Many AWS customers use consolidated billing, and often need to allocate costs across their internal business units or accounts. This can be challenging when dealing with services that are shared by all accounts. For general chargebacks, some customers use cost allocation tags for this purpose. However, at the time of writing this post, there is […]
How Glovo migrated their self-managed VPN solution to AWS Client VPN In this blog post Glovo shares how they migrated their ~4000 TLS virtual private network (VPN) users from their self-managed OpenVPN Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) solution to AWS Client VPN by also integrating with OneLogin for authentication and authorization. Amazon Web Services (AWS) Client […]
AWS Verified Access (AVA) provides secure access to applications from anywhere. AVA removes the need for a VPN, which simplifies the remote connectivity experience for end users and reduces the management complexity for IT administrators. But does the application need to be running in AWS to use AVA? The answer is No.  If you have […]
Introduction AWS Cloud WAN is a managed wide-area networking (WAN) service for building, managing, and monitoring a unified global network, as well as connecting resources running across your cloud and on-premises environments. With AWS Cloud WAN, you have a central place to create and manage your global routing configuration by creating a policy and achieving […]
Amazon VPC IP Address Manager (IPAM) is a VPC feature that allows you to plan, track, and monitor IP addresses for your AWS workloads. Until now, VPC IPAM allowed you to allocate CIDR blocks and monitor them at the VPC level. With a recent feature enhancement in VPC IPAM, you can now manage CIDR allocations […]
This is a guest post co-written with Roshan Raj, Cloud Network Specialist at ZS Associates In this blog post, we will highlight challenges faced by ZS to keep cost under control while managing a large, complex global network infrastructure which spans across multiple AWS Regions. We will show how ZS used Network Orchestration for AWS […]
AWS Network Manager is a great tool that lets you monitor changes in your network and create automations. In this post, we cover how to leverage events in Network Manager to get notified about network changes and how to use AWS Serverless technologies to enrich the information provided by these events. Let’s start with a simple question: What is Network […]
LambdaTest, a leading omnichannel test orchestration and execution cloud platform was looking to scale their multi-Region and hybrid networks. LambdaTest’s existing hybrid global network used AWS Site-to-Site VPN to connect their locations and Amazon Virtual Private Clouds (VPCs) across multiple AWS Regions. LambdaTest is growing rapidly, helping over 2 million developers run over 500 million […]
Amazon Web Services (AWS) customers can use the AWS global infrastructure to deploy workloads to multiple AWS Regions. They can create global networks that span multiple AWS Regions to connect these workloads to each other and to on-premises networks. A common design pattern is to use a central networking AWS account to own shared network resources, such as AWS Transit […]
In November 2022, Amazon Web Services (AWS) announced the launch of Amazon CloudFront continuous deployment, extending the functionality of your existing CloudFront distributions by allowing you to test and validate configuration changes to a percentage of live traffic before extending to your wider audience. Previously, customers had to do the heavy lifting of changing DNS […]