
  4 min read - If you’re signing on with a content delivery network (CDN) provider, you’ll probably see DNS as part of the standard service package. It’s only natural—to access your content delivered by the CDN, the Internet has to know where to send…                        

  4 min read - Every business outgrows its DIY or registrar DNS solution at some time. Here are signs you’re ready to upgrade to a premium DNS solution.                        

  4 min read - Explore the Hybrid Cloud Forecast, a podcast featuring a rotating cast of IBM fellows.                        

  3 min read - Successful businesses are embracing the power of AI to help streamline operations, generate insights, boost productivity and drive more value for clients. However, for many enterprises, the barrier to entry for integrating trustworthy, scalable and transparent AI remains high. In…                        

  10 min read - After developing a machine learning model, you need a place to run your model and serve predictions. Here is how I build such a model in IBM Db2.                        

  3 min read - If you want to make sustainable products today, dabbling at the edges no longer suffices. You must start at the design phase. For example, 80% of a product’s lifetime emissions is determined by product design. Achieving sustainability demands a transformation of thought. While 86% of companies have a sustainability strategy—with 73% of those set on a net-zero carbon emissions goal—only 35% act on that strategy. Backward-looking initiatives, like retrofitting products or alternate maintenance schedules, can make a dent in the…                        

  4 min read - In today’s world, data warehouses are a critical component of any organization’s technology ecosystem. They provide the backbone for a range of use cases such as business intelligence (BI) reporting, dashboarding, and machine-learning (ML)-based predictive analytics, that enable faster decision making and insights. The rise of cloud has allowed data warehouses to provide new capabilities such as cost-effective data storage at petabyte scale, highly scalable compute and storage, pay-as-you-go pricing and fully managed service delivery. Companies are shifting their investments…                        

  4 min read - Oftentimes big words get bandied around expressing what Trusted AI should be. Words like Transparency, Fairness, Explainability… but when it comes down to features and functions, there are a lot of question marks. (more…)                        

  < 1 min read - Why do organizations need a Data Fabric to achieve better business outcomes? Data is a critical component for enterprises looking to achieve better outcomes through data-driven decisions and processes. A data-driven approach can lead to improved decision making, minimization of risk, and competitive advantage. However, for many organizations leveraging data in an easily accessible and integrated way can be challenging. Many organizations have access to highly skilled resources and state-of-the-art technologies yet struggle to move the needle rapidly enough with…                        

  < 1 min read - Why do organizations need a Data Fabric to achieve better business outcomes? Data is a critical component for enterprises looking to achieve better outcomes through data-driven decisions and processes. A data-driven approach can lead to improved decision making, minimization of…                        

  2 min read - The Academy of Technology (AoT) is an all-volunteer community at IBM where participants work on projects that benefit the company, our employees, our clients, and the world. Members of the Academy and participants across IBM volunteer time outside of their…                        

  5 min read - Since Amazon announced the testing of drone deliveries nearly a decade ago, commercial drones have continued their flight across a variety of industries. Organizations around the world deploy commercial drones for deliveries or to gather video or images with an…                        

  3 min read - The MISUSE thread model framework can help technologists build safe applications and devices and identify how perpetrators may manipulate technology to harm vulnerable individuals.                        


                                                            Learn what sets apart a spear phishing attack from a bulk phishing attack—and how you can…                                                      

                                                            In this post, we're delving into another misconception about observability—that it's solely applicable to a specific…                                                      

                                                            IBM's Accelerated Incremental Mainframe Modernization (AIMM) technology is transforming support for caseworkers, children and their families.                                                      

                                                            Based on 14 years of development and input from electric utility experts, IBM has created the…                                                      

                                                            Learn more about the benefits, risks and business use cases of open source large language models…                                                      

                                                            Explore best practices for building an effective vulnerability management program to better secure your organization's IT…                                                      

                                                            The Log4j vulnerability—dubbed "Log4Shell"—still persists nearly two years later. Learn how to detect and patch the…                                                      

                                                            Today’s app environments demand an observability solution that provides real-time monitoring of containers, microservices and Kubernetes…                                                      

                                                            Reinvent how your business works with AI, transforming customer care, IT, network optimization and digital labor.                                                      

                                                            Selecting manufacturing execution system (MES) software is a critical decision for any manufacturing organization.                                                      