
Amazon Web Services (AWS) today announced the launch of AWS Marketplace in the AWS Secret Region, an expansion of the AWS Marketplace for the US Intelligence Community (ICMP) program. First deployed in 2016, ICMP is a digital catalog with software listings from independent software vendors (ISVs) that makes it easy for customers in the intelligence community (IC) to find, test, buy, and deploy software that runs on AWS. With this announcement, IC customers now have access to 30 ISVs and 170 products in the AWS Secret Region, an air-gapped cloud accredited to support workloads up to the Secret US security classification level.
The ICMP catalog has expanded based on feedback and requests from Department of Defense (DoD) and IC customers. Categories include security, networking, databases, data management, artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML), operating systems, DevOps, and business applications. Additionally, the catalog includes a government-approved list of value-added resellers (VARs) and AWS Channel Partners in ICMP that can be used to procure third-party software products in the AWS Secret Region.
AWS scans, tests, and verifies that all products work in the AWS Secret Region before listing them in ICMP. For classified deployments, all ICMP ISVs must be vetted for foreign ownership control and influence (FOCI) by the government prior to beginning contract performance.
The ICMP benefits customers and ISVs in several ways:
If you are interested in learning more about AWS Marketplace in the AWS Secret Region, please contact icmp@amazon.com or your AWS account executive.
Bryana is the program lead, national security customer advisor, and senior business development manager for the AWS Marketplace for the US Intelligence Community (ICMP) program. She has 15 years of experience supporting the government in both public and private sector roles, and is passionate about increasing the intelligence community's access to cutting edge technology in order to benefit national security. When she is not supporting customers’ ICMP journeys, Bryana can be found on outdoor adventures with her husband and two daughters.