
Amazon Web Services (AWS) is proud to join senior decision-makers and thought leaders from around the world at the 60th edition of the Munich Security Conference (MSC) from February 16-18. MSC is a leading global forum for discussing the most pressing international security challenges. Coming together at forums like this allows us to share our unique perspectives and key insights around critical security topics, helping to drive progress as we work to build a better and safer future. Going into the event, a few of the key themes we’re focused on include resilience, digital trust, government continuity, digital sovereignty, artificial intelligence (AI), and cybersecurity.
At MSC 2024, we’re restating our commitment to protecting the defense and national security of the US, its closest allies, and other like-minded countries around the world. We have more than a decade of experience working with security and defense organizations and remain focused on providing the best technology in the world to help our customers deliver on their critical missions.
The rise of warfare and geopolitical unrest around the globe is a reminder of how conflict extends across conventional and digital domains. It requires unprecedented speed of assessment, agility, and decisive action that is changing how governments and security organizations work. In this context, new collaborations and ways of working with tech companies must be advanced if allies are to achieve digital transformation, resilience, and interoperability at pace. Digital trust is the foundational pillar of these collaborations, which are being cemented through multilateral efforts, such as Japan’s G7 Data Free Flow with Trust (DFFT) initiative.
At the same time, governments are focused on keeping their digital assets and services protected and ensuring they’re positioned to maintain continuity during disruptions of any kind. Many are now using the cloud to improve resilience and mitigate risk. For instance, customers can use Continuity of Government IT on AWS (CGIT), a comprehensive cloud-based solution guide, to retain the integrity of critical datasets, back up applications, and transfer services to run in the cloud. CGIT helps reduce the risk of compromise and enables continuity of government services for improved citizen support.

Digital sovereignty has also continued to rise as a top priority for leaders around the world. AWS supports the development of an open and competitive digital ecosystem for Europe’s industries, governments, and citizens. It’s important that our customers have the freedom to build services quickly, securely, and efficiently using world-leading technology. In November 2022, we announced the AWS Digital Sovereignty Pledge – our commitment to offering all AWS customers the most advanced set of sovereignty controls and features available in the cloud. We continue to invent and innovate on behalf of customer and partner needs, and recently announced plans to launch the AWS European Sovereign Cloud. With a focus on providing customers with more choice, this is a new, independent cloud located and operated within the European Union (EU) that will have the same security, availability, and performance that our customers get from existing AWS Regions today with important features specific to evolving EU regulations.
Organizations are able to build solutions on the cloud that simply aren’t possible to build on legacy systems, such as generative AI. At AWS, we are committed to developing this technology in a responsible way with a team of dedicated responsible AI experts, complemented by AWS engineering and development teams that continually test and audit our products for fairness and accuracy. We support governments’ efforts to put in place effective risk-based regulatory frameworks and guardrails for AI and machine learning (ML), while also allowing for continued innovation and practical application of the technology.
Security is our top priority and millions of customers around the world trust AWS to keep their workloads protected. We look forward to building on our experience working with national security and defense customers and continuing to help them leverage the cloud to get the speed, agility, resilience, and security needed to advance their critical missions.
Learn more about CGIT, digital sovereignty at AWS, our defense and national security solutions, and contact an AWS Public Sector representative today.
Amazon Web Services