
Amazon Web Services (AWS) employs project management principles to deliver public sector cloud outcomes. These principles drive successful service launches, new solutions, and workload migrations. This blog post highlights project management tools, references, and AWS Management Console tips that give public sector customers better project visibility, automate task management, and help accelerate project outcomes.
A governance strategy enables an organization to manage multiple cloud projects simultaneously in a flexible, coordinated, and interdependent way. This helps teams have a common framework, align on security and compliance requirements, and coordinate with the right personnel. The following tips can help your agency develop a governance strategy.
With core requirements gathered, public sector agencies then define and prioritize projects that align with the overall cloud strategy. AWS conducts Working Backwards workshops with public sector agencies to help customers learn and use Amazon’s innovation mechanisms to solve their organizations’ mission-critical problems. These workshops address five key questions:
In 2021, Rhode Island’s Department of Labor and Training collaborated with AWS on a Working Backwards process that improved transparency for unemployment insurance claims. In a second example, technology company Civix conducted a Working Backwards workshop with AWS to reimagine voter experience. The City of Bellevue, Washington, used a similar workshop to address its Vision Zero strategy to improve road safety.
With this data, project teams can generate a path and project plan to deliver project outcomes. Contact your account team if you are interested in learning more about a Working Backwards workshop.
With a governance strategy, requirements, and a project plan in place, the next step is deciding the tools that aid the project’s success. Standardizing the tools can also help improve project efficiency. It reduces training time, eases stakeholder communications, and improves governance for inspecting one or multiple projects.
The following tips can help your agency select the right tool for your cloud project.
Understanding a tool’s availability, functionality, and integration requirements can help agencies select the best tool to advance their cloud project.
The AWS Management Console can also help augment project management activities, governance, and cost management.
Agencies can accelerate cloud outcomes by employing project management principles. At the organizational level, good governance policies and tools can support interdependent projects that align with the organization’s cloud strategies. Within a project, validating the requirements, selecting the right tools, and using automation or technology wherever possible can help agencies deliver project activities faster. AWS continues to develop tools, services, and solutions that support public sector agencies in meeting their cloud project outcomes.
Read related stories on the AWS Public Sector Blog:
Rochelle is a principal program manager within Project Kuiper, working closely with Amazon Web Services (AWS). She previously supported AWS technology and innovation projects, strategy, and operational planning. Rochelle has experience leading projects for federal customers such as the Department of Homeland Security, Department of Justice, and Department of State. She is a strong advocate for bringing more women to technology.
Courtney is a senior customer solutions manager at Amazon Web Services (AWS). She supports AWS federal customers and partners with cloud migration strategy, planning, and delivery. Courtney has more than a decade of experience supporting federal customers and their IT programs across agencies such as the Department of Defense, Department of Homeland Security, and Department of Commerce.