
Transit authorities across the globe want to monitor the driving habits of their fleet drivers to curtail unsafe driving, reduce safety-related incidents, and improve passenger experience. Transit agencies also want to provide meaningful feedback to their operators by providing them with relevant context for their unsafe driving. Fleet managers can use Amazon Web Services (AWS) to ingest and analyze fleet driver data. In this post, we will share how a large public transit agency in the United States (referred to as “Agency”) worked with AWS to create a proof-of-concept (POC) to analyze operator behavior and improve its visibility of sudden acceleration-based events. We will also share a few architectural patterns and a partner solution.
Historically, improving fleet operations is challenging because of the requirements to capture large disparate sets of data to analyze and determine operator behavior. The Agency responsible for public transportation in one of the largest cities in the US worked with AWS to track bus operators’ driving trends. Their goal is to curtail unsafe behavior and instill better driving habits. The solution has three main components: data acquisition, data analysis, and data insights and visualization of the data received from on-board bus sensors. Figure 1 is an architectural diagram of the Agency’s solution for collecting and analyzing bus operator behavior.
Figure 1. Architectural diagram of the Agency’s operator behavior analysis. The architecture uses AWS services such as Amazon Simple Storage Service, AWS Lambda, AWS Glue, Amazon Athena, and Amazon QuickSight.
The Agency is seeing success with this solution to identify sudden acceleration and braking events, and views these events on interactive dashboards. The next phase of their project will involve rolling out this POC to their entire bus fleet in a production environment.
Next, let’s dive deeper into the architectural patterns, which can be leveraged by other transit agencies to build similar solutions.
The high volume of data coming from a bus fleet makes it challenging to ingest and store it. Further, the data generated by various sensors is usually in different formats (such as proprietary electronic control unit (ECU) data, syslog data, or blob data). AWS provides services and capabilities to ingest, harmonize, and prepare data for different types of analysis. These are a few architecture patterns to leverage for data ingestion:
Data can come from different sources and in different formats, so it needs to be cleaned, standardized, and normalized before it’s analyzed. The first architectural pattern discussed (AWS IoT FleetWise and Timestream) offers capabilities of data standardization as part of the ingestion process itself. Once the data is in the Timestream database, you can use SQL to query data in Timestream to retrieve time series data from one or more tables. You can also integrate Timestream with other analytics and machine learning (ML) services for further analysis. Browse available integrations.
For the other two architectural patterns, the vehicle telemetry data stored in Amazon S3 needs to be cataloged to make it available for search and query. AWS Glue, a serverless data integration service, can help with identifying the data formats and suggesting the schemas of the stored data without moving it anywhere. You can do data discovery and classification using the crawler functionality, and store the associated metadata in AWS Glue Data Catalog in a query optimized canonical format.
You can use Athena, an interactive query service, to analyze data directly in Amazon S3 using standard SQL. Athena integrates with the AWS Glue Data Catalog, as well as offers Athena Federated Query for data in sources other than Amazon S3.
In addition to the vehicle telemetry data, many transit agencies are installing multiple cameras on buses to capture contextual information of the driving environment. The suite of artificial intelligence (AI) and ML services on AWS can help you analyze your camera feeds to recognize attributes for dangerous and distracted behavior. AWS Partner solutions such as Driver•i—a driver safety solution that uses vision-based technology to provide real-time feedback and generates thousands of data points—can capture driver behavior and vehicle performance on the road. Driver•i leverages a host of AWS services like Amazon S3 for highly durable, scalable, and accessible storage, AWS IoT for device management, Amazon Kinesis for streaming data processing, Lambda for event driven and serverless computing, and Amazon Simple Queue Service (Amazon SQS), Amazon Simple Notification Service (Amazon SNS), and Amazon Kinesis Data Firehose for providing efficient and scalable solutions to thousands of customers worldwide. Using AWS helps Driver•i process hundreds of millions of API calls daily and provides near real-time insights into safety events across the fleet.
Operators, depot managers, and executives at transit agencies need access to actionable insights about bus operators’ driving behavior to prevent unsafe driving practices and provide context-relevant feedback. With Amazon QuickSight, you can meet the aforementioned analytics needs from the same source of truth through interactive dashboards, paginated reports, embedded analytics, and natural language queries. This serverless and fully managed service allows you to directly connect to and import data from a wide variety of cloud, third-party and on-premises data sources, supporting various file formats.
In conclusion, driver operator behavior is a critical aspect of transportation management that directly impacts the safety, efficiency, and overall experience of passengers. In this post, we shared common architectural patterns on AWS to collect, store, and analyze vast volumes of data generated by transportations systems and generate actionable insights.
To learn more about how you can partner with AWS to build transportation solutions, explore these resources:
A special thanks to senior data scientist Tayo Ogunmakin, solutions architects Tariq Habib and Ola Ola, and solutions architect manager Mamta Vaidya for supporting the POC and architectural aspects of this solution.
Mehar is a senior solutions architect at Amazon Web Services (AWS) with extensive experience in cloud computing, security, and networking. Mehar has helped a number of public sector customers establish their technical cloud strategy and migration efforts. He is passionate about leveraging the power of technology to better serve citizens. Outside of work, he enjoys spending time with his family, traveling, and music.
Ravi is a principal solution architect at Amazon Web Services (AWS) and has more than 28 years of experience in architecting and delivering IT solutions. Prior to joining AWS, he led solution and enterprise architecture for automotive and life science verticals.