Sarah Storelli, left, interviews Valerie Singer during the fifth episode of the AWS Behind the Cloud vodcast.
The education industry witnessed rapid transformation during the COVID-19 pandemic, driven by student-centric, flexible learning. The industry made great strides in the digital divide, but there are still challenges that education leaders seek to address. Given generative artificial intelligence (AI) is revolutionizing every industry, I’m curious, like many of you, about the opportunities it provides in education. Generative AI has the potential to reduce inequities and allow global citizens to help diversify, rethink, advance, and positively impact education for all learners’ lifelong journeys and their future employers.
Valerie Singer, general manager of global education at Amazon Web Services (AWS), is an inspirational trailblazer who has devoted her career to unleashing the art of the possible in technology and making the world more equitable and accessible through education. If anyone knows how to leverage generative AI to help influence and advance the global education community, it’s Valerie.
I’m Sarah Storelli, senior global marketing leader for Worldwide Public Sector (WWPS) at AWS, and I’m on a quest to discover the people behind innovations across industries. In the vodcast series AWS Behind the Cloud, I connect with pioneers serving the public sector globally to learn more about how their stories shape and define the way they build and support cutting-edge technologies that help make the world a better place.
In the fifth episode of AWS Behind the Cloud, I sat down with Valerie to uncover:
Curious to learn more about Valerie’s journey and hear her insights about how generative AI plays a pivotal role in education around the world? Watch the latest episode of AWS Behind the Cloud now.
Learn more about how AWS helps higher education institutions innovate.  
Learn how AWS prepares learners for in-demand tech jobs. 
Learn more about AWS in Education.  
Learn more about Research on AWS. 
Learn more about how AWS helps support public sector organizations using generative AI.
Want to build in-demand cloud skills your way? Check out AWS Skill Builder. 
Watch more AWS Behind the Cloud vodcast episodes in the series.
Sarah Storelli oversees global marketing for Amazon Web Services (AWS) Worldwide Public Sector executive communications, customer programs, hospitality, and evangelism. She has a passion to help business, government, and society leverage tech for good through building strategic alliances and advocacy efforts. Sarah enjoys making the world a better place whenever possible through her various roles of service as a Trustee of the Consumer Technology Association Foundation, Member of the Cal Poly University President’s Council of Advisors, Chair of the Cal Poly English Department Advisory Board, and on the Board of Directors for World Institute on Disability and Center Point, Inc. She holds a degree in English with a minor in Law & Society from Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo.