Microsoft Access can fulfill your small-scale database needs, but you may encounter limitations related to scalability, reliability, security, and performance as the data grows. For instance, state and local government entities often employ Microsoft Access for tasks like inventory management and timesheet maintenance. As data volume expands, you might consider transitioning to a more robust […]
Capacity planning for large applications can be difficult due to constantly changing requirements and the dynamic nature of modern infrastructures. Traditional reactive approaches, for instance, relying on static thresholds for some DevOps metrics like CPU and memory, fall short in such environments. In this post, we show how you can perform predictive analysis on aggregated […]
Amazon Aurora is a high-performance, fully managed relational database service offered by AWS. It is compatible with MySQL and PostgreSQL, providing exceptional scalability, availability, and durability for your data. Amazon Aurora Global Database allows you to replicate up to five different AWS Regions and provides robust disaster recovery capabilities. To ensure the resilience and recovery […]
The American Family Insurance Group of companies includes American Family Insurance, CONNECT (powered by American Family Insurance), The General, Homesite, and Main Street America Insurance. It is the nation’s twelfth-largest property and casualty insurance group, ranking number 301 on the Fortune 500 list. Across these companies, the group has nearly 13,000 employees nationwide. The group […]
In this post, we learn how to stream data from Amazon DocumentDB (with MongoDB compatibility) to Amazon Redshift, unlocking near-real-time analytics and insights. We cover using Amazon DocumentDB change streams and Amazon Redshift streaming ingestion, along with AWS Lambda and Amazon Kinesis Data Streams. We also provide an AWS CloudFormation template for easy deployment of […]
Amazon RDS Proxy is a fully managed, highly available database proxy for Amazon Relational Database Service (Amazon RDS) that makes applications more scalable, more resilient to database failures, and more secure. With RDS Proxy, you can handle unpredictable surges in database traffic that might otherwise cause issues due to oversubscribing connections or creating new connections […]
In this post, we provide an overview of an enhancement to Amazon Managed Blockchain (AMB) Query which enables you to retrieve data on a public blockchain prior to finalization. AMB Query is a fully managed AWS service that provides high quality blockchain data delivered with sub-second latency to applications via uniform APIs across a number […]
Those who choose to take ownership of digital assets, such as cryptocurrency or non-fungible tokens (NFTs), are faced with a crucial decision when creating a wallet: do they opt to manage their own wallet or delegate that responsibility to a trusted third party? Non-custodial wallet solutions, whereby a user manages their own wallet, are popular […]
Generative AI has increased the possibilities for businesses to build applications that require searching and comparison of unstructured data types such as text, images, and video. Embeddings, or vectors, capture the meaning and context of this unstructured data in a machine-readable form, which is the basis for how similarity comparisons can be made directly in […]
Migrating from Oracle to PostgreSQL can involve several steps to ensure a smooth transition. A notable example is an Oracle collection, which is a feature that Oracle database developers commonly use. PostgreSQL does not directly support Oracle collections, and there currently isn’t an extension that adds this capability. There are several decisions you have to […]