The AWS Supply Chain team will be at NRF 2024: Retail’s Big Show to discuss upcoming retail supply chain focused capabilities and share the latest retail trends and technologies. AWS, Amazon, and AWS Partners enable retailers to accelerate innovation with proven born-from-retail, built-for-retailer technologies so they can meet today’s consumer expectations, optimize operations, and improve […]
I would like to wish everyone a wonderful, happy, and prosperous 2024, and share my supply chain management predictions as we start the new year. The landscape of supply chain management continues to evolve at an unprecedented pace. The past few years have been a testament to the resilience and adaptability of supply chains across […]
We announced four new capabilities for AWS Supply Chain at re:Invent 2023 to support upstream supply chain processes. AWS Supply Chain Supply Planning to help you plan, position, and replenish components and finished goods to reduce inventory costs and respond more quickly to demand variations and supply disruptions. AWS Supply Chain N-Tier Visibility to streamline […]
Product strategies are shaped by a combination of consumer demand, technology, and competition. With each variable change, the industry witnesses the introduction of new products, often accompanied by new features harnessing the latest technologies for enhanced user experience. This also initiates the phased retirement of the prior versions of the products. A prime example is […]
In my recent appearance on the Digital Supply Chain podcast, I had the opportunity to discuss how AWS Supply Chain solves customer problems. The conversation begins with the genesis of AWS Supply Chain, our vision for the application, and then shifts to various market trends and the future of supply chain. Below is a summary […]
Customers across all industries continue to leverage autonomous and disparate systems such as enterprise resource planning (ERP), order management systems (OMS), and enterprise data warehouse (EDW) to store supply chain and operational data. While these systems perform their basic function well, supply chain data remains locked in these disparate data source systems. The underlying data […]
Forests effectively combat global warming as massive carbon sinks that absorb more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere than it releases, making them one of the most effective and low-cost strategies to combat global warming. However, the impacts of climate change are beginning to outpace the ability of forests to regenerate naturally. Projections from the Ecological […]
We’re preparing for the future of supply chain with innovation on AWS Supply Chain. We innovate by working backwards from our customers, where we listen to you, understand your challenges, and gather your feedback. This approach ensures that our innovations are aligned with your evolving needs. AWS Supply Chain is a cloud-based application that helps […]
AWS was recognized as a notable vendor among retail planning platforms that help improve customer service, increase inventory turnover, and safeguard margins in the recent Forrester report, The Retail Planning Platforms Landscape, Q3 2023. This report provides an overview of retail planning platform vendors that help retailers manage demand and inventory planning. Forrester defines retail […]
Micro- and macroeconomic conditions, coupled with evolving customer demand patterns, exert persistent pressure on supply chain networks. Organizations must strive for greater efficiency and agility and proactively improve supply chain functions to improve performance and meet customer demand. Supply chain management systems include different functions that coordinate resources and business processes. Demand planning plays an […]