Product Manager, Google Maps Platform
Senior Software Engineer, Google Maps Platform
Unlock access to real world data and insights with a monthly $200 Google Maps Platform credit.
We’re taking our solar data and expanding coverage–far and wide. After launching the Solar API as part of our new suite of Environment APIs, we’ve continued to expand our coverage. We’re now able to provide valuable information to businesses in the solar industry for more than 472 million buildings in over 40 countries. This includes newly expanded coverage to over 95% of all buildings in the United States–nearly double our previous coverage.
Historically, our solar insights were computed using elevation maps and imagery captured by low flying airplanes in limited regions. With new advancements in machine learning, we’re now using a larger set of Google Map’s aerial imagery to produce detailed elevation maps and accurate solar projections for millions of buildings that previously had no data available. Our AI-enhanced height maps were internally evaluated based on geometric accuracy and predicted energy outputs, and developed closely with direct feedback from solar industry leaders from around the world. These advances help expand our comprehensive building data, solar potential insights, and detailed rooftop imagery broadly throughout North America, Europe, and Oceania. These advancements set the stage for future coverage expansions within our currently covered countries as well as expansions to new countries where data is not readily available.
Given the impact that access to reliable solar data can have on deploying renewable energy, we’re making it a top priority to roll out coverage across geographies where there is significant demand for this data. Since launch, solar companies have requested expanded coverage so they can unlock new markets, grow their business, and increase the amount of solar.
"Google has been adding more data, which has been great. Whenever that happens, we're happy, because we're paying less for higher quality imagery," explains Walid Halty, CEO at Mona Lee. "Google's Solar API has proven time and time again, where it's available, it's the best."
Benefits of integrating the Solar API
Our Solar API is being used to optimize solar panel arrays, make solar assessments and proposals more accurate and efficient, and to educate the public about transitioning to solar energy by showing homeowners the feasibility for their individual properties. Here are two examples of how our customers are using the Solar API:
Demand IQ AI chatbot for solar assessments
Demand IQ uses the Solar API to help solar companies provide online, accurate, real-time rooftop assessments to homeowners considering a transition to solar energy. By digitizing the solar shopping experience, companies can increase transparency, realize more conversions, and cut costs–while providing homeowners with useful, engaging information so they can make an informed decision.
“To support the transition to solar energy, we need to help customers make informed decisions, and we need to help solar providers to answer their questions with up-to-date, accurate data,” explains Austin Rosenbaum, CEO, Demand IQ. “With Demand IQ and the power of data from the Solar API, we now do that in real-time.”
To support energy efficiency at scale, MyHEAT uses solar data, insights, and imagery to educate residents, utility companies, and cities on the solar potential of their homes and buildings. The Solar API significantly reduces the time needed to deliver solutions, while also improving efficiency, accuracy, and the quality of their 3D map imagery.
We’ll be at the Intersolar North America and Energy Storage North America conference at the San Diego Convention Center from January 17-19. Stop by booth #649, where we’ll have live presentations at 11 am and 2 pm each day to share more about how our Solar API can enhance your solar offering.
For more information on Google Maps Platform, visit our website.
By Pavel Matveev • 3-minute read
By Erik Forman • 5-minute read
By Christopher Thomas Moore • 3-minute read
By Nicolas Adrian • 2-minute read