Amazon QuickSight is a business intelligence (BI) solution that any organization can leverage to share data and insights to anyone in the organization. As a serverless BI tool, it offers a comprehensive set of advanced analytics features, and one core benefit is that pricing is consumption based. That being said, Quicksight can be leveraged for different use cases and each variant might require a different method to track and report on the cost of running QuickSight. For example, perhaps you have deployed QuickSight as your main enterprise BI tool with thousands of users across dozens of departments and would like to charge back by department. Or maybe you have integrated QuickSight visuals in your software as a service (SaaS) application using namespaces to separate your customers by tenant to deliver insights to thousands or millions of users. In that case you want to track cost by tenant. In any scenario, it’s important to treat the platform like any other enterprise asset and optimize for cost, track usage by feature/user, implement best practices for governance, and aim to achieve operational excellence.
Effective cost allocation and resource management is a key responsibility in the cloud infrastructure space. AWS Cost and Usage Reports (AWS CUR) serves as the foundation for any reporting on cost in AWS. It provides a comprehensive list of cost incurred in that account across all AWS Services. In addition, AWS cost allocation tags are an important feature that AWS Billing offers. You can use these tags in AWS CUR, acting as labels for resources and offering in-depth insights into AWS environment consumption trends. They can transform the way expenses are allocated and managed in cloud infrastructures while enabling internal and external chargeback mechanisms.
In this post, we explore how you can use AWS CUR and AWS tags to monitor how specific users are using QuickSight. We also discuss how these tags can help organizations implement cloud cost controls by providing the data needed to support custom chargeback reporting.
Let’s take AnyCompany Inc., a fictional independent software vendor (ISV), as an example. AnyCompany uses QuickSight to provide analytics to their customers within their cloud-based service. With AWS CUR they obtain detailed information on usage by namespace and are able to produce comprehensive cost reports by tenant. They can further customize by using QuickSight tags to track expenses and make chargebacks to their internal departments, cost centers, projects, or clients.
Before you start applying tags and building QuickSight dashboards, complete the following prerequisite steps:
An alternative to these prerequisites is to implement the CUDOS solution. This will deploy AWS CUR and make data available in Amazon S3 and Athena. For more information, refer to Cloud Intelligence Dashboards.
The first step is to tag QuickSight users and assign key-value labels, which will be used in the CUR data. We use the AWS Command Line Interface (AWS CLI) and the tag-resource command. Complete the following steps:
In this example, we use costcenter as our tag key.

The tag key you created will be populated (it may take a few hours to be listed). By default, the tag will be in inactive.

It may take 24–48 hours to populate the newly activated tags into the Athena table for CUR reporting.


With the CUR deployed and users tagged, we are able to build a QuickSight dashboard that provides insights into QuickSight cost consumption. You can use the steps in this section as the starting point to build a custom cost dashboard tailored to the needs of your organization.
It’s important to highlight where certain key data points are originating from. With the following SQL statement, we are building a slice of the base CUR table for the purpose of our analysis. You can further customize this SQL statement to meet the specific needs of your organization. The following are the key terms extracted by CUR via the custom SQL:
Complete the following steps to build your dataset and analysis:
With the dataset prepared and available, we are able to build our analysis and dashboard. The following are some sample visualizations that you can build with a few clicks.
For session-based pricing, usage will be the number of sessions. For user-based pricing, usage represents the cost incurred for the month.

The namespace is captured in the preceding custom SQL by parsing the resource ID for username type resources.

The following screenshot shows our final dashboard.

To clean up your resources when you’re done with this solution. In AWS QuickSight, delete the dataset, analysis, and any dashboards that you created. In AWS Glue, delete tables or crawlers created. In AWS Billing, disable Data Export. In AWS S3, delete CUR data.
In this post, we showed how to set up tags, connect CUR data to Amazon S3, and build a QuickSight dashboard that provides detailed insights into QuickSight costs.
For many customers, this is just the beginning of what is possible with this solution. For example, as an analytics or BI administrator, now you have a way to send monthly paginated reports to department leadership with detailed QuickSight cost and usage for the departments that you manage. In addition, leadership could create alerts that track their cost compared to budgets. As a product owner in an ISV, now you have more precise tools to chargeback or monetize your BI offering. These possibilities provide BI admins with the detail needed to monitor and optimize the cost of all their QuickSight data products.
Get started by implementing Cost and Usage Reports and begin using QuickSight!
Ramon Lopez is a Principal Solutions Architect for Amazon QuickSight.  With many years of experience building BI solutions and a background in accounting, he loves working with customers, creating solutions and making world class services.  When not working he prefers to be outdoors in the ocean or up on a mountain.
Ashok Dasineni is a Solutions Architect for Amazon QuickSight. Before joining AWS, Ashok worked with clients and organizations in Banking and financial domain, focusing on fraud research and prevention. He designed and implemented innovative solutions to improve business process, reduce cost and increase revenue, enabling companies around the world to achieve their highest potential through data.
View Comments