As usual, a lot has happened in the Amazon Web Services (AWS) universe this past week. I’m also excited about all the AWS Community events and initiatives that are happening around the world. Let’s take a look together!
Last week’s launches  Here are some launches that got my attention:
Amazon Elastic Container Service (Amazon ECS) now supports managed instance draining – Managed instance draining allows you to gracefully shutdown workloads deployed on Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) instances by safely stopping and rescheduling them to other, non-terminating instances. This new capability streamlines infrastructure maintenance, such as deploying a new AMI version, eliminating the need for custom solutions to shutdown instances without disrupting their workloads. To learn more, check out Nathan’s post on the AWS Containers Blog.
Amazon Relational Database Service (Amazon RDS) for MySQL now supports multi-source replication – Using multi-source replication, you can configure multiple RDS for MySQL database instances as sources for a single target database instance. This feature facilitates tasks such as merging shards into a single target, consolidating data for analytics, or creating long-term backups within a single RDS for MySQL instance. The Amazon RDS for MySQL User Guide has all the details.
Amazon EMR Studio now comes with simplified create experience and improved start times – With the simplified console experience for creating EMR Studio, you can launch interactive and batch workloads with default settings more easily. The improved start times let you launch EMR Studio Workspaces for performing interactive analysis in notebooks in seconds. Have a look at the Amazon EMR User Guide to learn more.
Other AWS news Here are some additional projects, programs, and news items that you might find interesting:
Summarize news using Amazon Bedrock – My colleague Danilo built this application to summarize the most recent news from an RSS or Atom feed using Amazon Bedrock. The application is deployed as an AWS Lambda function. The function downloads the most recent entries from an RSS or Atom feed, downloads the linked content, extracts text, and makes a summary.
AWS Community Builders program – Interested in joining our AWS Community Builders program? The 2024 application is open until January 28. The AWS Community Builders program offers technical resources, education, and networking opportunities to AWS technical enthusiasts who are passionate about sharing knowledge and connecting with the technical community.
AWS User Groups – The AWS User Group Yaounde Cameroon embarked on a 12-week workshop challenge. Over 12 weeks, participants explored various aspects of AWS and cloud computing, including architecture, security, storage, and more, to develop skills and share knowledge. You can read more about this amazing initiative in this LinkedIn post.
AWS open-source news and updates – My colleague Ricardo writes this weekly open source newsletter in which he highlights new open source projects, tools, and demos from the AWS Community.
Upcoming AWS events Check your calendars and sign up for these AWS events:
AWS Innovate: AI/ML and Data Edition – Register now for the Asia Pacific & Japan AWS Innovate online conference on February 22, 2024, to explore, discover, and learn how to innovate with artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML). Choose from over 50 sessions in three languages and get hands-on with technical demos aimed at generative AI builders.
AWS Community re:Invent re:Caps – Join a Community re:Cap event organized by volunteers from AWS User Groups and AWS Cloud Clubs around the world to learn about the latest announcements from AWS re:Invent.
You can browse all upcoming in-person and virtual events.
That’s all for this week. Check back next Monday for another Weekly Roundup!
— Antje
This post is part of our Weekly Roundup series. Check back each week for a quick roundup of interesting news and announcements from AWS!
Antje Barth is a Principal Developer Advocate for generative AI at AWS. She is co-author of the O’Reilly books Generative AI on AWS and Data Science on AWS. Antje frequently speaks at AI/ML conferences, events, and meetups around the world. She also co-founded the Düsseldorf chapter of Women in Big Data.
View Comments