On December 4, 2023, AWS was named as a Leader in the 2023 Magic Quadrant for Strategic Cloud Platform Services (SCPS). AWS is the longest-running Magic Quadrant Leader, with Gartner naming AWS a Leader for the thirteenth consecutive year. AWS is placed highest on the Ability to Execute axis.
SCPS, previously known as Magic Quadrant for Cloud Infrastructure and Platform Services (CIPS), is defined as “standardized, automated, public cloud offerings integrating infrastructure services (for example, computing, network, and storage), platform services (for example, managed application and data services) and transformation services (programs/resources that help customers adopt cloud-oriented IT delivery models).”
I have the chance to talk with our customers every single week. When I ask the main reasons why they choose AWS, I consistently hear the following responses:
A large set of capabilities. AWS offers more cloud services and features than other providers, including compute, storage, databases, machine learning (ML), data analytics, and Internet of Things (IoT). This allows faster, easier, and cheaper cloud migration of existing apps and building new apps. AWS has the deepest functionality within services, such as a wide variety of purpose-built databases optimized for cost and performance.
A rapid pace of innovation. AWS enables faster experimentation and innovation through the latest technologies. We continually accelerate innovation pace to invent new technologies for business transformation. For example, in 2014, we launched the serverless computing service AWS Lambda, eliminating server provisioning and management for developers. In 2017, we launched the AWS Nitro System, a combination of dedicated hardware and a lightweight hypervisor that enables better performance, increased security, and cost savings for Amazon EC2 instances. At re:Invent 2018, we announced AWS Graviton, a family of processors designed to deliver the best price performance for your cloud workloads running in Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2). And today, we continue to innovate with generative artificial intelligence (AI) services such as Amazon Q or Amazon CodeWhisperer, your coding productivity tool available in developer’s integrated development environment (IDE) and on the command line (CLI).
A large community of customers and partners. AWS has a large, active community with millions of customers and tens of thousands of partners globally. Customers in most industries and of varied sizes use AWS for diverse applications. The AWS Partner Network includes thousands of systems integrators specializing in AWS and tens of thousands of independent software vendors (ISV) adapting their technologies for AWS.
You also benefit from the global AWS infrastructure, including the 33 Regions where you can deploy your workload and store your data. We pre-announced four future Regions in Malaysia, New Zealand, Thailand, and the AWS European Sovereign Cloud.
An AWS Region is a physical location in the world where we have multiple Availability Zones. Availability Zones consist of one or more discrete data centers, each with redundant power, networking, and connectivity, housed in separate facilities. Unlike with other cloud providers, who often define a region as a single data center, having multiple Availability Zones allows you to operate production applications and databases that are more highly available, fault-tolerant, and scalable than would be possible from a single data center.
AWS has more than 17 years of experience building its global infrastructure. And, as Werner Vogels, Amazon CTO, keeps repeating, “There’s no compression algorithm for experience,” especially when it comes to scale, security, and performance.
Here is the graphical representation of the 2023 Magic Quadrant for Strategic Cloud Platform Services.
The full Gartner report has details about the features and factors they reviewed. It explains the methodology used and the recognitions. This report can serve as a guide when choosing a cloud provider that helps you innovate on behalf of your customers.
Gartner, 2023 Magic Quadrant for Strategic Cloud Platform Services, 4 December 2023, David Wright, Dennis Smith, et. al.
Gartner does not endorse any vendor, product or service depicted in its research publications and does not advise technology users to select only those vendors with the highest ratings or other designation. Gartner research publications consist of the opinions of Gartner’s research organization and should not be construed as statements of fact. Gartner disclaims all warranties, expressed or implied, with respect to this research, including any warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.
GARTNER is a registered trademark and service mark of Gartner and Magic Quadrant is a registered trademark of Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the U.S. and internationally and are used herein with permission. All rights reserved.
This graphic was published by Gartner, Inc. as part of a larger research document and should be evaluated in the context of the entire document. The Gartner document is available upon request from AWS.
 
Seb has been writing code since he first touched a Commodore 64 in the mid-eighties. He inspires builders to unlock the value of the AWS cloud, using his secret blend of passion, enthusiasm, customer advocacy, curiosity and creativity. His interests are software architecture, developer tools and mobile computing. If you want to sell him something, be sure it has an API. Follow him on Twitter @sebsto.
View Comments