Introduction According to industry researcher IHS Markit, the estimated number of IP cameras deployed worldwide was approaching 1 billion by the end of 2021, and according to Gartner’s Emerging Tech: Revenue Opportunity Projection of Computer Vision report, enterprise computer vision (CV) software, hardware and services in key markets is expected to generate global revenue of […]
Introduction Today, AWS IoT Core announces the general availability of self-managed client certificate signing for AWS IoT Core fleet provisioning. The new self-managed certificate signing capability allows you to integrate with an external certificate authority (CA), your own public key infrastructure (PKI), or popular CA services such as AWS Private CA, to sign certificate signing […]
Introduction If you operate secure private networks—such as an assembly line’s operational technology (OT) network at a factory or government agency­—and intend to connect your devices to AWS, then you need to use X.509 client certificates for authenticating requests to AWS services—all while staying within the Virtual Private Cloud (VPC). In this post, we will demonstrate how […]
Introduction Critical infrastructure customers are challenged to make industrial networks more accessible without significantly increasing cybersecurity risks. This is due in part to the common practice of using Industrial IoT (IIoT) and cloud technologies to analyze large volumes of industrial data to improve operational efficiencies. To be successful, this practice requires a balance between advancing […]
Introduction Increasingly, business leaders are adopting Internet of Things (IoT) solutions to drive revenue growth, streamline operations, and reduce costs. Managing security and safety considerations while connecting your assets to the cloud, whether they’re industrial machines or autonomous vehicles, can be challenging. In the Ten security golden rules for Industrial IoT (IIoT) Solutions, AWS recommends establishing secure […]
Unlocking all of the insights hidden within manufacturing data has the potential to enhance efficiency, reduce costs and boost overall productivity for numerous and diverse industries. Finding insights within manufacturing data is often challenging, because most manufacturing data exists as unstructured data in the form of documents, equipment maintenance records, and data sheets. Finding insights […]
Over the last few years, the industrial and manufacturing sectors have witnessed an accelerated transformation fueled by the advancement of the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), artificial intelligence (AI), and machine learning (ML). At the heart of this transformation is data, which when harnessed effectively, can propel businesses to new heights of operational efficiency, innovation, […]
Today, we are excited to announce that AWS IoT FleetWise now supports vehicle vision system data collection that enables customers to collect metadata, object list and detection data, and images or videos from camera, lidar, radar and other vision sub-systems. This new feature, now available in Preview, builds upon existing AWS IoT FleetWise capabilities that […]
Introduction Honeybees live in swarms of tens of thousands, gathering nectar. In this process, they carry pollen from one flowering plant to another, pollinating them. ” Close to 75 percent of the world’s crops producing fruits and seeds for human use depend, at least in part, on pollinators[1]. ” As well as being one of nature’s key pollinators, bees transform […]
As part of the Manufacturing sector’s digitization process, Industry 4.0 automation drives real-time, data acquisition from industrial equipment on the plant floor. This data and immediate feedback have become a mission-critical requirement. In addition, recent supply chain disruptions have increased the lead time to procure edge hardware resulting in several months delays to modernization projects. […]