This blog was co-authored by Paul Schiller, Product Marketing Manager, and Golan Simani, Director, Cloud & Tech Operations, TAG.
In the rapidly evolving world of broadcast, the bar for quality is set higher than ever. Viewers, armed with an expanding choice of content and platforms, demand consistent and superior experiences. Within this context, the value of monitoring and quality of experience (QoE) tools in broadcast operations emerges more prominently than ever.
In this blog post, we discuss how the TAG Realtime Media Performance platform helps broadcasters maintain operational and engineering familiarity with traditional master control room (MCR) workflows by leveraging native AWS services to facilitate TAG’s alarm capabilities. We compare the solution to a traditional monitoring workflow and discuss key design considerations.
Within the broadcast facility, the master control room (MCR) stands as the operational core, directing and refining the flow of content. Here, live feeds and pre-recorded content from diverse sources converge, where each signal’s integrity, from its source to its format, is monitored and processed as needed.
An MCR’s main components include routing switchers that allow operators to dynamically assign feeds to their intended outputs. In the case of technical disruptions or programming changes, the MCR operator quickly redirects, pulling from backups or alternate sources when necessary.
Automated tools are deployed for rigorous quality control, catching anomalies in video and audio. After QC clearance, signals are routed for transmission, whether via satellite uplink, terrestrial IP distribution, or internet streaming.
Lastly, multiviewers are at the heart of an MCR, where different aspects of audio, video, and metadata signals are monitored and logged for compliance purposes. The monitoring solutions enable operators to quickly respond to issues such as signal loss and black or frozen signals. This is paramount for many broadcasters, as delays in resolution can result in significant on-air gaps, impacting viewer experience and broadcaster revenue.
With such a broad spectrum of potential issues, an operator’s ability to swiftly diagnose a problem is crucial, regardless of where a system is running (on-premises, cloud, or hybrid). But it’s not just about identifying disruptions; it’s about rapid, effective response while maintaining operational familiarity. This requirement is magnified as MCR operators face a sheer volume of channels they oversee; each channel has a unique set of content, transmission requirements, and potential pitfalls. Monitoring hundreds of channels means that operators must keep track of thousands of individual signal elements and scheduling lists.
Operators must also proactively anticipate issues, often juggling between different feeds to prioritize and which to monitor closely based on factors like viewership numbers, event significance, or historical data about a channel’s reliability. Different channels might use different equipment, protocols, or software depending on the workflow targets, such as over-the-top (OTT), Satellite, and Terrestrial distribution. Operators must often be familiar with a broad range of systems and adept at using diagnostic tools efficiently.
As broadcasters move their workflows to the cloud, providing familiar and consistent automation tools to the operators while ensuring scalability and resiliency is critical.
TAG excels in the monitoring space, with deep probing and analysis within a user-friendly interface, ensuring easy integration with an array of broadcast tools and software, creating a holistic ecosystem. By running on AWS, TAG enables workflows to continuously adapt to the latest transport streams, codecs, and standards to monitor the health of all streams.
With 500+ deep-probing capabilities, user-defined thresholds allow notifications (including severity levels and durations) to be delivered as event-driven alarms to downstream systems. Combined with AWS’s managed services, including Amazon Managed Streaming for Apache Kafka (MSK), AWS Lambda, Amazon Simple Notification Service (SNS), and Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3), customers can automate the monitoring and switching of video content based on defined thresholds, from a simple notice to minor, major, or even critical alerts.
Figure 1 – Set thresholds and severity for over 500 types of errors with TAG Realtime Media Platform
Figure 2 – Solution Architecture Diagram
Figure 3 – Channel Events list provided by TAG

Example of the JSON event published to Amazon MSK.
Figure 4 – Amazon MSK as AWS Lambda Trigger
The integration of TAG’s Realtime Media Platform with AWS infrastructure presents a technically advanced approach to broadcast monitoring and management. By leveraging TAG’s in-depth visualization and real-time alert system, MCR operators gain an efficient toolset to monitor hundreds of channels simultaneously. On the infrastructure side, the scalability of AWS its secure cloud environment ensures that resources are allocated dynamically based on demand, aiding in system optimization. Additionally, this integration streamlines operations, reducing the need for disparate systems management. This convergence of TAG and AWS represents not just a merging of services, but a holistic solution crafted to address the intricate, technical demands of modern broadcasting monitoring. If you would like to learn more, please reach out to TAG for a demo at https://tagvs.com/.
Boris is a Media & Entertainment Sr. Solutions Architect at Amazon Web Services, specializing in Broadcast. He previously worked in multiple roles in the industry with advanced technology projects involving IP video transport and playout systems.
View Comments