Amazon Redshift is a fast, petabyte-scale, cloud data warehouse that tens of thousands of customers rely on to power their analytics workloads. Thousands of customers use Amazon Redshift read data sharing to enable instant, granular, and fast data access across Redshift provisioned clusters and serverless workgroups. This allows you to scale your read workloads to […]
Many customers are extending their data warehouse capabilities to their data lake with Amazon Redshift. They are looking to further enhance their security posture where they can enforce access policies on their data lakes based on Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3). Furthermore, they are adopting security models that require access to the data lake […]
Many organizations use identity providers (IdPs) to authenticate users, manage their attributes, and group memberships for secure, efficient, and centralized identity management. You might be modernizing your data architecture using Amazon Redshift to enable access to your data lake and data in your data warehouse, and are looking for a centralized and scalable way to […]
Monitoring data pipelines in real time is critical for catching issues early and minimizing disruptions. AWS Glue has made this more straightforward with the launch of AWS Glue job observability metrics, which provide valuable insights into your data integration pipelines built on AWS Glue. However, you might need to track key performance indicators across multiple […]
Amazon MSK Serverless is a cluster type of Amazon Managed Streaming for Apache Kafka (Amazon MSK) that makes it straightforward for you to run Apache Kafka without having to manage and scale cluster capacity. MSK Serverless automatically provisions and scales compute and storage resources. With MSK Serverless, you can use Apache Kafka on demand and […]
Gupshup is a leading conversational messaging platform, powering over 10 billion messages per month. Across verticals, thousands of large and small businesses in emerging markets use Gupshup to build conversational experiences across marketing, sales, and support. Gupshup’s carrier-grade platform provides a single messaging API for 30+ channels, a rich conversational experience-building tool kit for any […]
Public health organizations need access to data insights that they can quickly act upon, especially in times of health emergencies, when data needs to be updated multiple times daily. For example, during the COVID-19 pandemic, access to timely data insights was critically important for public health agencies worldwide as they coordinated emergency response efforts. Up-to-date […]
AWS Glue is a serverless data integrating service that you can use to catalog data and prepare for analytics. With AWS Glue, you can discover your data, develop scripts to transform sources into targets, and schedule and run extract, transform, and load (ETL) jobs in a serverless environment. AWS Glue jobs are responsible for running […]
Amazon OpenSearch Service is a fully managed search and analytics service powered by the Apache Lucene search library that can be operated within a virtual private cloud (VPC). A VPC is a virtual network that’s dedicated to your AWS account. It’s logically isolated from other virtual networks in the AWS Cloud. Placing an OpenSearch Service […]
Amazon OpenSearch Service offers multiple domain configuration settings to meet your workload-specific requirements. As part of standard service operations, you may be required to update these configuration settings on a regular basis. Recently, Amazon OpenSearch Service launched visibility improvements that allow you to track configuration changes more effectively. We’ve introduced granular and more descriptive configuration […]