Monitoring data pipelines in real time is critical for catching issues early and minimizing disruptions. AWS Glue has made this more straightforward with the launch of AWS Glue job observability metrics, which provide valuable insights into your data integration pipelines built on AWS Glue. However, you might need to track key performance indicators across multiple jobs. In this case, a dashboard that can visualize the same metrics with the ability to drill down into individual issues is an effective solution to monitor at scale.
This post, walks through how to integrate AWS Glue job observability metrics with Grafana using Amazon Managed Grafana. We discuss the types of metrics and charts available to surface key insights along with two use cases on monitoring error classes and throughput of your AWS Glue jobs.

Grafana is an open source visualization tool that allows you to query, visualize, alert on, and understand your metrics no matter where they are stored. With Grafana, you can create, explore, and share visually rich, data-driven dashboards. The new AWS Glue job observability metrics can be effortlessly integrated with Grafana for real-time monitoring purpose. Metrics like worker utilization, skewness, I/O rate, and errors are captured and visualized in easy-to-read Grafana dashboards. The integration with Grafana provides a flexible way to build custom views of pipeline health tailored to your needs. Observability metrics open up monitoring capabilities that weren’t possible before for AWS Glue. Companies relying on AWS Glue for critical data integration pipelines can have greater confidence that their pipelines are running efficiently.
AWS Glue job observability metrics are emitted as Amazon CloudWatch metrics. You can provision and manage Amazon Managed Grafana, and configure the CloudWatch plugin for the given metrics. The following diagram illustrates the solution architecture.

Complete following steps to set up the solution:
Now the CloudWatch data source has been registered.
The next step is to prepare the JSON template file.
Lastly, configure the dashboard.
The Grafana dashboard visualizes AWS Glue observability metrics, as shown in the following screenshots.
  
The sample dashboard has the following charts:
Let’s try analyzing the causes of job run failures of the job iot_data_processing.
First, look at the pie chart [Reliability] Job Run Errors Breakdown. This pie chart quickly identifies which errors are most common.

Then filter with the job name iot_data_processing to see the common errors for this job.

We can observe that the majority (75%) of failures were due to glue.error.DISK_NO_SPACE_ERROR.
Next, look at the line chart [Resource Utilization] Disk Used (%) to understand the driver’s used disk space during the job runs. For this job, the green line shows the driver’s disk usage, and the yellow line shows the average of the executors’ disk usage.

We can observe that there were three times when 100% of disk was used in executors.
Next, look at the line chart [Throughput] Records Read & Write to see whether the data volume was changed and whether it impacted disk usage.

The chart shows that around four billion records were read at the beginning of this range; however, around 63 billion records were read at the peak. This means that the incoming data volume has significantly increased, and caused local disk space shortage in the worker nodes. For such cases, you can increase the number of workers, enable auto scaling, or choose larger worker types.
After implementing those suggestions, we can see lower disk usage and a successful job run.

We can optionally configure a cross-account setup. Cross-account metrics depend on CloudWatch cross-account observability. In this setup, we expect the following environment:
To configure a cross-account setup for this environment, complete the following steps for each account.
Complete the following steps to configure your monitoring account:
Now the account is successfully configured as a monitoring account.
You will use the copied URL from the source account in the next steps.
Complete the following steps to configure your source account:
You can see the CloudWatch settings page, with some information filled in.
Now your source account has been configured to link to the monitoring account. The metrics emitted in the source account will show on the Grafana dashboard in the monitoring account.
To learn more, see CloudWatch cross-account observability.
The following are some considerations when using this solution:
AWS Glue job observability metrics offer a powerful new capability for monitoring data pipeline performance in real time. By streaming key metrics to CloudWatch and visualizing them in Grafana, you gain more fine-grained visibility that wasn’t possible before. This post showed how straightforward it is to enable observability metrics and integrate the data with Grafana using Amazon Managed Grafana. We explored the different metrics available and how to build customized Grafana dashboards to surface actionable insights.
Observability is now an essential part of robust data orchestration on AWS. With the ability to monitor data integration trends in real time, you can optimize costs, performance, and reliability.
Noritaka Sekiyama is a Principal Big Data Architect on the AWS Glue team. He is responsible for building software artifacts to help customers. In his spare time, he enjoys cycling with his new road bike.
Xiaoxi Liu is a Software Development Engineer on the AWS Glue team. Her passion is building scalable distributed systems for efficiently managing big data on the cloud, and her concentrations are distributed system, big data, and cloud computing.
Akira Ajisaka is a Senior Software Development Engineer on the AWS Glue team. He likes open source software and distributed systems. In his spare time, he enjoys playing arcade games.
Shenoda Guirguis is a Senior Software Development Engineer on the AWS Glue team. His passion is in building scalable and distributed data infrastructure and processing systems. When he gets a chance, Shenoda enjoys reading and playing soccer.
Sean Ma is a Principal Product Manager on the AWS Glue team. He has an 18-year track record of innovating and delivering enterprise products that unlock the power of data for users. Outside of work, Sean enjoys scuba diving and college football.
Mohit Saxena is a Senior Software Development Manager on the AWS Glue team. His team focuses on building distributed systems to enable customers with interactive and simple to use interfaces to efficiently manage and transform petabytes of data seamlessly across data lakes on Amazon S3, databases and data-warehouses on cloud.
View Comments