Many organizations use identity providers (IdPs) to authenticate users, manage their attributes, and group memberships for secure, efficient, and centralized identity management. You might be modernizing your data architecture using Amazon Redshift to enable access to your data lake and data in your data warehouse, and are looking for a centralized and scalable way to define and manage the data access based on IdP identities. AWS Lake Formation makes it straightforward to centrally govern, secure, and globally share data for analytics and machine learning (ML). Currently, you may have to map user identities and groups to AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) roles, and data access permissions are defined at the IAM role level within Lake Formation. This setup is not efficient because setting up and maintaining IdP groups with IAM role mapping as new groups are created is time consuming and it makes it difficult to derive what data was accessed from which service at that time.
Amazon Redshift, Amazon QuickSight, and Lake Formation now integrate with the new trusted identity propagation capability in AWS IAM Identity Center to authenticate users seamlessly across services. In this post, we discuss two use cases to configure trusted identity propagation with Amazon Redshift and Lake Formation.
Trusted identity propagation provides a new authentication option for organizations that want to centralize data permissions management and authorize requests based on their IdP identity across service boundaries. With IAM Identity Center, you can configure an existing IdP to manage users and groups and use Lake Formation to define fine-grained access control permissions on catalog resources for these IdP identities. Amazon Redshift supports identity propagation when querying data with Amazon Redshift Spectrum and with Amazon Redshift Data Sharing, and you can use AWS CloudTrail to audit data access by IdP identities to help your organization meet their regulatory and compliance requirements.
With this new capability, users can connect to Amazon Redshift from QuickSight with a single sign-on experience and create direct query datasets. This is enabled by using IAM Identity Center as a shared identity source. With trusted identity propagation, when QuickSight assets like dashboards are shared with other users, the database permissions of each QuickSight user are applied by propagating their end-user identity from QuickSight to Amazon Redshift and enforcing their individual data permissions. Depending on the use case, the author can apply additional row-level and column-level security in QuickSight.
The following diagram illustrates an example of the solution architecture.

In this post, we walk through how to configure trusted identity propagation with Amazon Redshift and Lake Formation. We cover the following use cases:
This walkthrough assumes you have set up a Lake Formation administrator role or a similar role to follow along with the instructions in this post. To learn more about setting up permissions for a data lake administrator, see Create a data lake administrator.
Additionally, you must create the following resources as detailed in Integrate Okta with Amazon Redshift Query Editor V2 using AWS IAM Identity Center for seamless Single Sign-On:
This use case assumes you have the following prerequisites:
In this post, we use an AWS Glue crawler to create the external table ny_pub stored in Apache Parquet format in the Amazon S3 location s3://<bucketname>/data/NY-Pub/. In the next step, we create the solution resources using AWS CloudFormation to create a stack named CrawlS3Source-NYTaxiData in us-east-1.
The stack creates the following resources:

When the stack is complete, continue with the following steps to finish setting up your resources:
After the crawler is complete, you can see a new table called ny_pub in the Data Catalog under the automountdb database.
After you create the resources, complete the steps in the next sections to set up Lake Formation permissions on the AWS Glue table ny_pub for the sales IdP group and access them via Redshift Spectrum.
Complete the following steps to enable Lake Formation propagation for the Redshift managed application created in Integrate Okta with Amazon Redshift Query Editor V2 using AWS IAM Identity Center for seamless Single Sign-On:
Complete the following steps to set up Lake Formation as an IAM Identity Center application:
The integration status will update to Success.  Alternatively, you can run the following command:
In this section, we register the data with Lake Formation. Complete the following steps:
Next, verify that the IAMAllowedPrincipal group doesn’t have permission on the database.
Complete the following steps to grant database permissions to the IAM Identity Center group:
Alternatively, you can run the following command:
Next, you grant table permissions to the IAM Identity Center group.
Alternatively, you can run the following command:
Complete the following steps to set up Redshift Spectrum table access:
Complete the following steps to validate access:

This use case assumes you have IAM Identity Center integration with Amazon Redshift set up, with Lake Formation propagation enabled as per the instructions provided in the previous section.
Complete the following steps to create a data share:
Now you can register the data share in Lake Formation as an AWS Glue database.
After the AWS Glue database is created on the Redshift data share, you can view it under Shared databases.
Complete the following steps to grant database permissions to the IAM Identity Center group:
Next, grant table permissions to the IAM Identity Center group.
Complete the following steps:
Complete the following steps to access the data shares:
With Transitive Identity Propagation we can now audit user access to dataset from Lake Formation dashboard and service used for accessing the dataset providing complete trackability. For federated user Ethan whose Identity Center User ID is ‘459e10f6-a3d0-47ae-bc8d-a66f8b054014’ you can see the below event log.

Complete the following steps to clean up your resources:
In this post, we covered how to simplify access management for analytics by propagating user identity across Amazon Redshift and Lake Formation using IAM Identity Center. We learned how to get started with trusted identity propagation by connecting to Amazon Redshift and Lake Formation. We also learned how to configure Redshift Spectrum and data sharing to support trusted identity propagation.
Learn more about IAM Identity Center with Amazon Redshift and AWS Lake Formation. Leave your questions and feedback in the comments section.
Harshida Patel is a Analytics Specialist Principal Solutions Architect, with AWS.
Srividya Parthasarathy is a Senior Big Data Architect on the AWS Lake Formation team. She enjoys building data mesh solutions and sharing them with the community.
Maneesh Sharma is a Senior Database Engineer at AWS with more than a decade of experience designing and implementing large-scale data warehouse and analytics solutions. He collaborates with various Amazon Redshift Partners and customers to drive better integration.
Poulomi Dasgupta is a Senior Analytics Solutions Architect with AWS. She is passionate about helping customers build cloud-based analytics solutions to solve their business problems. Outside of work, she likes travelling and spending time with her family.
View Comments