AWS Glue is a serverless data integrating service that you can use to catalog data and prepare for analytics. With AWS Glue, you can discover your data, develop scripts to transform sources into targets, and schedule and run extract, transform, and load (ETL) jobs in a serverless environment. AWS Glue jobs are responsible for running the data processing logic.
One important feature of AWS Glue jobs is the ability to use bookmark keys to process data incrementally. When an AWS Glue job is run, it reads data from a data source and processes it. One or more columns from the source table can be specified as bookmark keys. The column should have sequentially increasing or decreasing values without gaps. These values are used to mark the last processed record in a batch. The next run of the job resumes from that point. This allows you to process large amounts of data incrementally. Without job bookmark keys, AWS Glue jobs would have to reprocess all the data during every run. This can be time-consuming and costly. By using bookmark keys, AWS Glue jobs can resume processing from where they left off, saving time and reducing costs.
This post explains how to use multiple columns as job bookmark keys in an AWS Glue job with a JDBC connection to the source data store. It also demonstrates how to parameterize the bookmark key columns and table names in the AWS Glue job connection options.
This post is focused towards architects and data engineers who design and build ETL pipelines on AWS. You are expected to have a basic understanding of the AWS Management Console, AWS Glue, Amazon Relational Database Service (Amazon RDS), and Amazon CloudWatch logs.
To implement this solution, we complete the following steps:
The following diagram illustrates the components of this solution.
For this solution, we provide an AWS CloudFormation template that sets up the services included in the architecture, to enable repeatable deployments. This template creates the following resources:
To deploy the solution, complete the following steps:

In this section, we connect to the RDS for PostgreSQL instance via AWS Lambda and create two tables. We also insert sample data into both the tables.
 The two tables product and address will be created with sample data, as shown in the following screenshot.

We run the multiple_job_bookmark_keys AWS Glue job twice to extract data from the product table of the RDS for PostgreSQL instance. In the first run, all the existing records will be extracted. Then we insert new records and run the job again. The job should extract only the newly inserted records in the second run.
The job extracts only those records that have a combination greater than the previously extracted records.

We now run the parameterized AWS Glue job that takes the table name and bookmark key column as parameters. We run this job to extract data from different tables maintaining separate bookmarks.
The first run will be for the address table with bookmarkkey as address_id. These are already populated with the job parameters.
The job maintains separate bookmarks for each of the tables when extracting the data from the source data store. This is achieved by adding the table name to the job name and transformation contexts in the AWS Glue job script.
To avoid incurring future charges, complete the following steps:
This post demonstrated passing more than one column of a table as jobBookmarkKeys in a JDBC connection to an AWS Glue job. It also explained how you can a parameterized AWS Glue job to extract data from multiple tables while keeping their respective bookmarks. As a next step, you can test the incremental data extract by changing data in the source tables.
 Durga Prasad is a Sr Lead Consultant enabling customers build their Data Analytics solutions on AWS. He is a coffee lover and enjoys playing badminton.
 Murali Reddy is a Lead Consultant at Amazon Web Services (AWS), helping customers build and implement data analytics solution. When he’s not working, Murali is an avid bike rider and loves exploring new places.
View Comments