Organizations adopt software-as-a-service (SaaS) applications to provide employees with tools that meet their growing collaboration and productivity needs. As the adoption of these tools increase, IT and security teams must spend more time connecting each application to their security tools to keep corporate data secure and meet compliance regulation requirements. The challenge is that audit […]
How can I add Amazon Lex voice bots my existing telephony services? Many customers would like to improve the customer contact experience by incorporating voice chatbots. However, customers may not want to disrupt their telephony infrastructure in order to add this capability — for example, they may wish to leverage existing infrastructure, retain telephone numbers, […]
Amazon Healthcare businesses rely on dozens of third-party software-as-a-service (SaaS) applications to help scale their business quickly. These organizations require continuous audit log ingestion and central data normalization to power threat detection, investigation, and incident response in preferred security analytics solutions. Amazon Healthcare Security (Amazon HealthSec) enables businesses to secure first-party and third-party SaaS applications […]
Today, AWS AppFabric, a service that connects multiple SaaS applications to enhance security and increase productivity, announced a new feature that helps application developers reimagine end-user productivity in software-as-a-service (SaaS) applications by generating insights and actions with context from multiple applications. Since launching AppFabric, IT professionals connect 19 different SaaS applications to monitor application logs […]
On average, today’s organizations use over 100 software-as-a-service (SaaS) applications. In order to keep SaaS data secure, IT and security teams must figure out how to support each app. They may choose to build point-to-point integrations or they can rely on security tool vendors to offer connections to a portion of their supported SaaS apps. […]
Generative artificial intelligence (AI) can help you quickly summarize a multi-page report into a paragraph, book your flights, and create an itinerary for your upcoming vacation. Today, we’re seeing the next wave of widespread machine learning adoption, and generative AI will reinvent and customize every application and customer experience. Generative AI drives innovation within SaaS […]
Times of hyper growth cause you to move fast and make quick decisions, often leaving security gaps in your software-as-a-service (SaaS) application security policies and procedures. These gaps expose you to security incidents within your SaaS applications that may go undetected. In order to implement corporate security policies to keep data secure, you must make […]
Monitoring audit log data from software-as-a-service (SaaS) applications helps security analysts and IT administrators quickly identify and respond to possible corporate security threats. While studies indicate that organizations license over 100 SaaS applications for their organization, each SaaS application has different data formats making it challenging to determine how to get the security insights you […]
Companies often license and manage dozens of software-as-a-service (SaaS) applications, with some deploying more than 100 applications annually, for communications, finance, content management, and customer relations. While their hope is that these purpose-built applications make employees more productive, the applications rarely work well together, creating security and productivity challenges. At AWS, we’ve seen a fundamental […]
Many companies offer over 100 different tools and applications designed to enhance employee productivity and collaboration. Today, organizations customize and fortify their application stack to unlock their employee’s best work, but this introduces challenges. Applications are often disconnected and operate in their own data silos, hampering an employees’ ability to manage, access, share, and create […]