GM & VP of Engineering, Data & Analytics
GM & VP of Engineering, Databases
Coming to Las Vegas, April 9–11.
We’re excited to share that Gartner has recognized Google as a Leader and is positioned furthest in vision among all vendors evaluated in the 2023 Gartner® Magic Quadrant™ for Cloud Database Management Systems. As a Leader in this report for four consecutive years, we believe Google’s position is a testament to delivering continuous customer innovation in areas such as built-in intelligence, open data ecosystems and unified data offerings.
Download the complimentary 2023 Gartner Magic Quadrant for Cloud Database Management Systems report.
"The market has been undergoing a significant shift as companies look to move to more modern, cloud-first approaches. This shift is being driven by a number of factors, including the need for greater agility, scalability, cost savings, and the desire to leverage generative AI capabilities in conjunction with data to innovate." said Sanjeev Mohan, Principal Analyst at SanjMo and Former Gartner VP. “The way in which Google Cloud is approaching the entire data and AI stack through principles of simplification, unification and open standards is well-aligned to what customers are looking for in a long-term strategic partner.”
Data is critically important to every organization’s AI journey. A strong data foundation can accelerate enterprise-wide AI and revenue growth, according to interviews with hundreds of global executives. The higher an organization’s data maturity, the stronger its AI capabilities and offerings tend to be, the survey found.
However, many organizations are still struggling to extract the full business value of data due to disparate tools and data sources, as well as poor data quality. Moreover, organizations are managing an increasing variety of databases and analytics workloads, resulting in additional complexity, overhead, and risk.
With Google’s Data and AI Cloud, our vision is to bring the simplicity, scalability, security, and intelligence of Google's data approach to your business, allowing you to unify your data, leverage the best of open source compatibility, all while providing the latest AI capabilities, so you can unlock the full potential of that data.
Google’s Data and AI Cloud is based on the principle of simplicity, enabling you to interconnect your data at multiple levels. It provides an open and unified data platform that allows organizations to manage every stage of the data lifecycle — from running operational databases for applications, to managing analytical workloads across data warehouses and data lakes, to data-driven decision making, to AI and machine learning.
Google’s Data and AI Cloud architecture is distinctive, so you can unify your data, people, and workloads. Our databases are built on a highly scalable, distributed storage system with fully disaggregated resources and high-performance Google-owned global networking. This combination allows us to provide tightly integrated data services across AlloyDB, BigQuery, BigLake, Bigtable, Cloud SQL, Dataflow, Dataplex, Dataproc, and Spanner.
We recently launched several capabilities that further strengthen these integrations, making it even easier to accelerate innovation:
Google Cloud provides industry leading integration with open source and open APIs, helping to ensure portability, flexibility, and reducing the risk of vendor lock-in. These integrations include BigQuery Migration Service to accelerate migration from traditional data warehouses and the Database Migration Service to help you migrate and modernize your operational databases. You can also take advantage of our managed database services that are fully compatible with popular open-source engines such as PostgreSQL, MySQL, and Redis.
We continue to focus on making Google Cloud the most open data cloud. Some recent launches in this area include:
We’ve also significantly expanded our data cloud partner ecosystem, and are increasing our partner investments across many new areas. Today, more than 1,000 software partners are building their products using Google’s data cloud, and more than 70 data platform partners offer validated integrations through our Google Cloud Ready - BigQuery initiative. We also announced Google Cloud Ready for Cloud SQL, a program that recognizes partner solutions that have met integration requirements with Cloud SQL. This program joins our existing Google Cloud Ready for AlloyDB partner program.
AI provides numerous opportunities to activate your data. So, we made AI easily accessible to all your data teams and also made it effortless to use your data to train AI models. Here are some recent launches:
We are honored to be recognized as a Leader in the 2023 Gartner Magic Quadrant for Cloud Database Management Systems.
We look forward to continuing to innovate and partner with you on your digital transformation journey. Download the complimentary 2023 Gartner Magic Quadrant for Cloud Database Management Systems report.
2023 Gartner Magic Quadrant for Cloud Database Management Systems, Adam Ronthal, Henry Cook, Rick Greenwald, Aaron Rosenbaum, Ramke Ramakrishnan, Xingyu Gu, December 18, 2023.
Gartner does not endorse any vendor, product or service depicted in its research publications and does not advise technology users to select only those vendors with the highest ratings or other designation. Gartner research publications consist of the opinions of Gartner’s Research and Advisory organization and should not be construed as statements of fact. Gartner disclaims all warranties, expressed or implied, with respect to this research, including any warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.
GARTNER is a registered trademarks and service mark, and MAGIC QUADRANT is a registered trademark of Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the US and internationally and are used herein with permission. All rights reserved. This graphic was published by Gartner, Inc. as part of a larger research document and should be evaluated in the context of the entire document. The Gartner document is available upon request from Google.
By Vladimir Elvov • 6-minute read
By Marcel Fohrmann • 4-minute read
By Omid Fatemieh • 5-minute read
By Jeremy Chang • 5-minute read