We are retiring three specialty AWS Certifications in April 2024: AWS Certified Data Analytics – Specialty, AWS Certified Database – Specialty, and AWS Certified: SAP on AWS – Specialty. Given how quickly technology changes, we’re always reviewing our certifications and evaluating how well we’re meeting customers’ needs. We see the opportunity to serve our customers better by reducing the number of specialty certifications and enhancing our offerings at the foundational, associate, and professional levels.
One example of this change in our focus is the launch of the new AWS Certified Data Engineer – Associate certification in 2024.
According to the World Economic Forum, by 2025, about 463 exabytes of data (equivalent to 212.7 million DVDs) are projected to be generated globally every day. The massive growth in data has spurred the need for professionals such as data engineers, data analysts, and data scientists across every industry.
Per IDC*, rapid tech advances and the need for specialized skills is heightening demand for individuals with data expertise. However, the limited talent pool is making it difficult for organizations to get the right people into the right roles. North American IT leaders report the greatest difficulty, with 55% citing difficulty filling Data Engineer roles.
AWS Certified Data Engineer – Associate validates an individual’s skills and knowledge in core data-related AWS services, and offers employers a means of developing and hiring qualified data engineers who can analyze, manipulate, and ensure high quality data for insights and analysis that drive business outcomes. This new AWS Certification will be available to schedule and take starting March 12, 2024.
If you hold any of the three retiring specialty AWS Certifications, your credential will continue to be active for three years from the date you earned it. You’ll still be able to display your digital badge from Credly.
If your certification is going to expire this year and you would like to maintain it in active status, be sure to retake the exam before it is retired: by April 8 for AWS Certified Data Analytics – Specialty, and by April 29 for AWS Certified Database – Specialty and AWS Certified: SAP on AWS – Specialty. You won’t be able to recertify after the retirement dates because we will no longer offer these exams.
We’ll also retire exam prep materials for these three specialty certifications on AWS Skill Builder. Exam prep materials include Official Practice Question Sets, Official Practice Exams, and the Exam Prep courses. The last day to access these exam prep materials is April 8, 2024 for exam prep materials related to AWS Certified Data Analytics – Specialty, and April 29 for exam prep resources related to AWS Certified Database – Specialty and AWS Certified: SAP on AWS – Specialty.
AWS Training and Certification will continue to offer a variety of free and paid digital training resources on AWS Skill Builder for data analytics and database, including learning plans for specific types of solutions. We recently added new digital courses for SAP on AWS with more upcoming courses covering topics such as RISE with SAP and SAP Business Technology Platform. For additional training on SAP on AWS designed specifically for AWS Partners, go to the AWS Partner Network portal to access AWS Partner Training. Watch the account setup tutorial to learn how to create a free account to access Partner-exclusive training.
*IDC, What AI and Data Roles Are Most Difficult to Fill at Enterprises Worldwide?, Doc:# US50846023, June 2023