VP/CISO, Google Cloud
Get the latest on security from Cloud CISO Phil Venables.
Welcome to the first Cloud CISO Perspectives for December 2023. Today I’ll be providing an update to our cloud security megatrends blog. First published in January 2022, the premise of cloud security megatrends is that there were eight “megatrends” that drive technological innovation.
It’s become clear that artificial intelligence has emerged as the ninth megatrend. While generative AI has defined this year as a disruptive technology that presents tremendous potential to revolutionize and transform the way we do business, Google has been applying machine learning and AI for security since at least 2005. Read on to see how AI fits into the cloud security megatrends rubric, and how understanding these megatrends can help business and security leaders improve their overall security posture.
As with all Cloud CISO Perspectives, the contents of this newsletter are posted to the Google Cloud blog. If you’re reading this on the website and you’d like to receive the email version, you can subscribe here.
Introducing Google Cloud’s new curated board of directors hub, highlighting resources on cybersecurity, risk governance, and security transformation.
Introducing Google Cloud’s new curated board of directors hub, highlighting resources on cybersecurity, risk governance, and security transformation.
What started as pattern recognition evolved into machine learning, and that has since become a whole range of artificial intelligence tools including generative AI and underlying foundation models. AI has been the sleeper megatrend, first slowly and now rapidly becoming an integral part of what we do — broadly in IT, and especially in security as the challenge of stopping threats required creative adaptation. Similarly to cloud computing or any new technology, AI changes the risk landscape — both positively and negatively.
Security teams can adopt several approaches to understanding their security controls, including Breach and Attack Simulation (BAS) and Security Validation. BAS has proved useful to security teams needing a point-in-time understanding of how specific security controls perform; however, as the threat landscape and attack surface have broadened, BAS tools are often inadequate for true validation of security performance.
To more comprehensively test their defenses, organizations require critical functionality needed for continuous validation of security performance across their security infrastructure.
For all of its uses, AI is assuredly a cloud security megatrend that can increasingly fuel and accelerate all the other megatrends. While we also expect to see AI help attackers, AI should give defenders an advantage because AI is good at amplifying capability based on data — and defenders have more data.
For example, Google Cloud recently launched Duet AI for Security Operations, a generative AI tool that helps security teams detect, investigate, and respond to threats — including by analyzing large amounts of data in seconds, reducing time-consuming manual reviews, and improving response time.
In the long run, while AI is beneficial to cloud and on-premises systems, we believe that it can help cloud security more than on-prem security. AI taps into the virtuous circle of security improvement. Since generative AI models broadly become more useful when they’re trained on larger sets of data, there’s an immediate scaling problem that gen AI faces if it can only be trained from on-premises data. Clouds let you store and process more data to train (and tune) a foundation model on, and security-focused gen AI will become significantly better when it relies on not just “big data” but “massively huge data available in the cloud.”
Security gen AI foundation models such as Google Cloud’s fit squarely in the flywheel of security innovation. It depends on cloud technology, and it can also make cloud security better. While it may be possible to create similar gains for AI with on-prem as in the cloud, it's very unlikely because training AI is much easier (and easier to rapidly improve) with the data available in the cloud.

Generative AI has the potential to revolutionize how we use technology, especially in cybersecurity. We are hopeful that it can significantly lighten the burden — and possibly even eliminate — three of security’s thornier problems: toil, threat overload, and the talent gap.
Enabling progress in AI means focusing on the opportunities it presents, the responsibilities we bear as we develop it, and securing AI from malicious use and hacking.
The bottom line is that cloud computing megatrends will propel security forward faster, for less cost and less effort than any other security initiative. With the help of these megatrends, the advantage of cloud security over on-prem is inevitable.
The Google Cloud Cybersecurity Forecast report can help prepare security professionals and business leaders now for 2024.
The Google Cloud Cybersecurity Forecast report can help prepare security professionals and business leaders now for 2024.
Here are the latest updates, products, services, and resources from our security teams so far this month:
To have our Cloud CISO Perspectives post delivered twice a month to your inbox, sign up for our newsletter. We’ll be back in two weeks with more security-related updates from Google Cloud.
By Dr. Grazia Frontoso • 3-minute read
By Phil Venables • 6-minute read
By Gillian Hamilton • 3-minute read
By Dr. Nicolai Baldin • 5-minute read