VP, TI Security & CISO, Google Cloud
Get the latest on security from Cloud CISO Phil Venables.
Welcome to the first Cloud CISO Perspectives of the year, and the first of our two newsletters for January. Today I’ll be discussing some of the important changes to the Cybersecurity Risk Management, Strategy, Governance, and Incident Disclosure rules as outlined by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
As with all Cloud CISO Perspectives, the contents of this newsletter are posted to the Google Cloud blog. If you’re reading this on the website and you’d like to receive the email version, you can subscribe here.
Introducing Google Cloud’s new curated board of directors hub, highlighting resources on cybersecurity, risk governance, and security transformation.
Introducing Google Cloud’s new curated board of directors hub, highlighting resources on cybersecurity, risk governance, and security transformation.
The start of a new year brings new opportunities, and not always in ways that we expect. One of the new realities of 2024 is that publicly-traded organizations on the U.S. exchanges are subject to new rules from the SEC, a change that took effect in December. They define requirements for when and how those organizations must disclose material cybersecurity incidents and require a new annual disclosure addressing management and oversight of risks from cybersecurity threats. With these requirements may come more scrutiny on CISOs.
This may seem intimidating, but I believe that the new rules help clarify expectations around breach disclosure, and can even improve cybersecurity incident disclosure, document governance, compliance, and risk management programs.
Certainly, we expect to see a formalization in breach-related disclosures as public companies are explicitly required to file a Form 8-K current report with the SEC when they experience a material cybersecurity incident. These current reports should include the “nature, scope, and timing, as well as its material impact or reasonably likely material impact” of the incident on the reporting organization.
However, organizations are not required to provide excessive technical details, which might expose them to future incidents, and crucially, they do not have to file their report from the moment that an incident is discovered. Instead, they must file their report to the SEC within four days of determining the materiality of an incident. A material incident is when “there is a substantial likelihood that a reasonable investor would attach importance,” the rules say.

This means that determining the materiality of an incident will require improved crisis communications within organizations, since legal, business, and technical teams will have to come together to make that judgment call. Achieving that goal means more and earlier preparation in the form of conversations about what needs to be reported to the SEC to meet the disclosure rules without sharing confidential information. If your organization doesn’t have an incident response plan, or hasn’t reviewed the plan in light of the new rules, this is a very good opportunity to do so.
Organizations can also ask the Department of Justice for a delay in reporting incidents to the SEC when the disclosure itself presents a significant risk to national security or public safety. We have seen historical examples that might qualify for delayed disclosure, so organizations should use their technical teams to identify potentially qualifying incidents and familiarize themselves with the relevant DOJ guidance.
We encourage business and security leaders to prioritize engaging with CISA and the FBI when incidents occur, especially since doing so is separate from the SEC reporting requirement and does not trigger the four-day timeline. As evident from several recent incidents, engaging with federal agencies can help your business recovery process and provide invaluable insights to prevent future victims.
The new SEC reporting process is only one of many U.S. incident response regulations (such as the upcoming CIRCIA 72-hour deadline for reporting cybersecurity incidents that affect critical infrastructure) that organizations must abide by.
The business value of being able to meet the requirements of the new rules is clear, and aligns with our best-practice guidance. When organizations take security maturity and risk management more seriously, they are both less susceptible to material cyber-incidents and, potentially, more appealing to investors.
At Google Cloud, we have discussed with great interest from security leaders how to move from artisanal security to operating at industrial scale. Please join us as we shift the conversation to explore how organizations can refine and optimize their security approach to thrive in today’s environment.
At Google Cloud, we have discussed with great interest from security leaders how to move from artisanal security to operating at industrial scale. Please join us as we shift the conversation to explore how organizations can refine and optimize their security approach to thrive in today’s environment.
Here are the latest updates, products, services, and resources from our security teams so far this month:
To have our Cloud CISO Perspectives post delivered twice a month to your inbox, sign up for our newsletter. We’ll be back in two weeks with more security-related updates from Google Cloud.
By Dr. Grazia Frontoso • 3-minute read
By Phil Venables • 6-minute read
By Gillian Hamilton • 3-minute read
By Dr. Nicolai Baldin • 5-minute read