1. Introduction Migration Evaluator is a complimentary migration assessment service that helps customers to create a data-driven directional business case for migrating workloads to AWS. It includes a data collection tool that discovers server workloads running on-premises, along with their utilization patterns. Data from the Migration Evaluator collector needs to be received by the AWS […]
Introduction A security or data breach can lead to both financial and reputational losses. Maintaining security and compliance is a shared responsibility between AWS and you (our customer), where AWS is responsible for “Security of the Cloud” and you are responsible for “Security in the Cloud”. However, security in the cloud has a much bigger […]
AWS Config advanced queries provide a SQL-based querying interface to retrieve resource configuration metadata of AWS resources and identify resource compliance state. You can use AWS Config advanced queries in a single AWS Account and Region or in a multi-account and cross-region setup with AWS Config configuration aggregators. Writing queries requires you to know SQL […]
This post is co-written with Conor Teer, Senior Software Engineer, at EverQuote, David Kelly, Principal Software Engineer at EverQuote, and Mark O’Connell, SVP of Engineering at EverQuote. EverQuote is a leading online insurance marketplace that helps protect life’s most important assets- family, property, and future by simplifying the experience of shopping for insurance, making it […]
Customers are increasingly seeking an efficient solution to manage their expanding AWS resources, spanning AWS accounts and Regions, amidst changes like mergers, acquisitions, and cloud migrations. AWS Tags offer an effective solution for organizing, identifying, and filtering resources by categorizing them based on criteria such as purpose, owner, or environment. AWS customers would like to […]
Amazon CloudWatch Internet Monitor provides near-continuous internet measurements for your internet traffic, including availability and performance metrics, tailored to your specific workload footprint on AWS. With Internet Monitor, you can get insights into average internet performance metrics over time, as well as get alerts for issues (health events). You’re notified about events that impact your […]
Introduction Application modernization involves discovery, analysis, extraction, containerization and deployment of an application migrated to AWS. The AWS Application Migration Service (AWS MGN) simplifies and expedites your migration to AWS by automatically converting your source servers from physical, virtual, or other cloud infrastructure to run natively on AWS. In this post, I use post-launch actions […]
Migrations are complex and involve many teams from all levels of an organization. A 2020 Accenture Cloud Value Study found the top barriers to cloud value realization outlined by 700+ IT leaders were misalignment, legacy infrastructure, and lack of skills. Organizations want to keep their applications secure and compliant as they move to the cloud, […]
AWS constantly innovates on its customers’ behalf and strives to improve customer experience by reducing complexity. With AWS, customers look to spend their time solving business problems without worrying about operating their infrastructure. Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS) on AWS Fargate allows customers to run Kubernetes pods without worrying about creating and managing the lifecycle […]
Introduction The purpose of this blog post is to show the steps on how to change the lifecycle status of a source server from “Ready for testing” to “Ready for cutover” to bypass the testing steps when using the AWS Application Migration Service (MGN). This approach can be used for specific scenarios where you want […]