
Coming to Las Vegas, April 9–11.
In the world of technology and cloud computing, the news comes fast and furious. Blink and you’ll miss it. As we wind down the final days of 2023, here’s a look at the top stories of the year that we published on the Google Cloud blog — the product launches, research findings, and initiatives that resonated most with you.
The Google Cloud community started the year in a contemplative mood, thirsty for tools to give them deeper insights from their data, and more holistic views of their environments. The top stories of the month were:
In February, readers looked ahead. We unveiled a new pricing approach that is decidedly forward-looking, made inroads on futuristic immersive technology, and planted seeds with the telecommunications community at Mobile World Congress. Readers were also really excited for the global roll-out of AlloyDB. The top stories for the month were:
If there has been one overarching theme to Google Cloud for 2023, it’s been generative AI, which made its first real showing this month, with the launch of support for the technology in Vertex AI, alongside an avalanche of news from our first-ever Data Cloud & AI Summit.
We kicked the AI story up a notch in April with segment-specific news, and a glimpse into our AI-optimized infrastructure. We also made it easier for customers to interact with Google Cloud professional services, and introduced gamified training!
Google I/O is usually a consumer-focused show, but Google Cloud’s foundational role in enabling generative AI let our news take center stage, including the launch of the Duet AI brand. With that as the backdrop, it’s no surprise readers were also excited about new multicloud connectivity capabilities.
Three short months after announcing support for generative AI for Vertex AI, we made good by bringing it to general availability, and expanding it to search experiences. We also helped thread the needle between generative AI and databases with vector support, and shared how generative AI is helping to evolve the threat landscape.
July is usually a relatively quiet month, as people head out on vacations, but not this year — the launch of even more models for our AI builder tools proved just as enticing as a day at the beach. We also shook up the MySQL community with a bold new Cloud SQL Enterprise Plus offering, and introduced a new, visual way for developers to connect their applications.
If you think that generative AI news dominated Google Cloud Next this month, you’re only half right. It was certainly a thread in all our leading announcements, but there was also a lot of excitement for more traditional Google Cloud specialties around data analytics and Kubernetes.
Enough with the generative AI news already :) In September, readers remembered that it’s a big world out there, and that Google Cloud is a cloud provider with global coverage. From dashboards to databases, from subsea cables to blockchain, this month’s most popular stories showcased the breadth and depth of Google Cloud’s offerings.
Around here, we like to talk about having a healthy disregard for the impossible. Like mitigating the largest-ever DDoS attack — again. Or rethinking Ethernet. Or halving the cost of Spanner compared to the competition. Whatevs, no big deal.
Security researchers never sleep, and neither do our systems engineers, uncovering significant new vulnerabilities, and beating records for the world’s largest distributed training job for large language models. Oh, and Memorystore for Redis got an upgrade that delivered 60X more throughput.
Halfway through the month, we’re pretty sure we know what the top stories will have been: anything related to Gemini, Google’s latest and most capable AI model. Also a special shout out to Google Cloud’s Learning Content team, whose post about free generative-AI trainings shot up to be the top-viewed post of the entire year — in the matter of a few days. Seems like you are all as excited as we are about the Gemini era!
And that’s a wrap! On behalf of the Google Cloud blog team, wishing you peaceful and happy holiday season, and looking forward to seeing you here on these pages in 2024.
By Google Cloud Content & Editorial  • 1-minute read
By Richard Seroter • 3-minute read
By Google Cloud Content & Editorial  • 29-minute read
By Aqsa Fulara • 3-minute read