Managing passwords is a hassle, similar to how people misplace their keys. In the world of on-premises Active Directory (AD) environments, passwords represent a potential security risk and are a complicated issue to tackle. This is especially true for remote users that utilize Amazon WorkSpaces. They may encounter difficulties when it comes to password management—particularly […]
Our friends at Liquidware and PEER Software collaborated with AWS to publish a blog to showcase how you can utilize Liquidware ProfileUnity and Peer Global File Service (“PeerGFS”) to replicate a user’s profile and data to standby Amazon WorkSpaces in a separate Region. This offers a business continuity and disaster recovery solution for your end users to remain productive during disruptive events. To […]
In this blog, I discuss how customers can use Keycloak as their Identity Provider (IDP) of choice when implementing SAML 2.0 federation with Amazon WorkSpaces. Keycloak is an open-source solution providing a cost-effective means for customers to use enterprise level IDP features without incurring monthly subscription costs. With SAML 2.0 authentication, customers can access their […]
Customers use Amazon AppStream 2.0 to deploy fleets of virtualized desktops and applications to their end customers, and supports a myriad of persistent storage solutions. AppStream 2.0 provides out-of-box functionality with many common storage options for users of your organization such as Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3), Amazon WorkDocs, Google Drive for G Suite, and […]
Customers are able to implement a custom session resolver for NICE DCV Connection Gateways using serverless AWS services. This approach provides a secure endpoint that resolves DCV connections at scale without requiring dedicated infrastructure. Administrators benefit from the built-in high availability, increase in agility, and cost optimizations offered by serverless technology. End users connecting through […]
Cloud native application streaming enables end users to access native applications from any device, anywhere, and any time. Amazon AppStream 2.0 service enables application vendors and organizations to simplify and accelerate their native application delivery. As the demand for this service grows, the need to fully automate the deployment gains significance. Orchestrating AppStream 2.0 end-to-end […]
Customers using Amazon AppStream 2.0 frequently encounter end user experience challenges while using collaboration tools like Zoom®. It can be mitigated by adhering to key recommendations and best practices that can significantly streamline the operations related to AppStream 2.0 environment. In this blog, we will delve into a similar scenario in one of our global […]
Increasingly, organizations are considering ways to move away from the deployment and management of traditional thick client endpoints. Factors such as cost, increased security, and a desire for flexibility and simplified management are key drivers for a growing number of customers. Additionally, with the advent of End User Computing services in the cloud, organizations are […]
Customers often ask how to gain additional insights into their Amazon WorkSpaces operating system resource utilization, such as CPU utilization and memory consumption. In addition, they want to use these metrics with Amazon CloudWatch dimensions to dive into trends and compare WorkSpaces instances.  In a previous blog, we highlighted how to use CloudWatch to understand […]
HHMI’s Janelia Research Campus in Ashburn, Virginia has an integrated team of lab scientists and tool-builders who pursue a small number of scientific questions with potential for transformative impact. To drive science forward, we share our methods, results, and tools with the scientific community. Introduction To study how the brain works, researchers often begin with […]