Growing industry-level data science skills in education institutions
Students of the University of Milano-Bicocca can grow industry-level data science skills by taking part in a Machine Learning II Challenge, recently launched in collaboration with KNIME, the open source data science company. 
One of the best ways to gain industry-level practical knowledge is to participate in data science competitions. The Machine Learning II Challenge is designed by Prof. Fabio Stella and KNIME. Students will work to predict smokers via their body signals data.
17% of the world smokes and it’s a hard habit to quit. Analysis of smokers’ so-called “body signals” – from eyesight, to blood pressure, cholesterol, dental caries, and more – provides a deeper understanding of the health risks associated with smoking and insight to develop strategies to help smokers stop smoking.
Students attending the Machine Learning course at Milano-Bicocca are competing to train and deploy a machine learning model to detect smokers in the Kaggle Body Signal of Smoking dataset. In teams of three, the students are challenged to also design and develop an interactive dashboard to visualize the interactions and relationships among smokers’ body signals. 
The student data scientists will use the low-code KNIME Analytics Platform to build and deploy their machine learning solutions. Competition deliverables include KNIME workflows and a technical report. The jury will appraise the report for technical merit, clarity of expression, and communication of ideas, and the workflows for complexity, cleanness, and usability.
The winning teams will be announced on April 19 and invited to present their projects at KNIME Data Connect Italy on May 6. The event is open to attend onsite in Milan, or online.
The 1st-place team will be awarded a summer internship at KNIME. 1st and 2nd place winners are offered a place on a data science specialization course. The three winning teams all receive a digital badge and trophy, plus an article published about their solutions in KNIME’s community journal on Medium, Low Code for Advanced Data Science.
The KNIME Educators Alliance collaborates regularly with educators to provide support for teaching data science with KNIME. This is the second machine learning challenge with the University of Milan-Bicocca. 
“This was an incredible opportunity to gain firsthand experience in the world of data analysis and machine learning,” said Vittorio Haardt, Masters student in Data Science at the University of Milano-Bicocca, and member of the 1st-place winners of the Machine Learning Challenge, Spring 2023. ”We are proud of our success in the competition and grateful for this opportunity to take our skills to the next level.”
We wish all participants good luck!