This post is written by Dennis Kieselhorst, Principal Solutions Architect. The combination of portability, efficiency, community, and breadth of features has made Java a popular choice for businesses to build their applications for over 25 years. The introduction of serverless functions, pioneered by AWS Lambda, changed what you need in a programming language and runtime […]
Building and training generative artificial intelligence (AI) models, as well as predicting and providing accurate and insightful outputs requires a significant amount of infrastructure. There’s a lot of data that goes into generating the high-quality synthetic text, images, and other media outputs that large-language models (LLMs), as well as foundational models (FMs), create. To start, […]
Directly invoking AWS AppSync GraphQL API targets from EventBridge simplifies and streamlines integration between these two services, ideal for notifying a variety of subscribers of data changes in event-driven workloads. You can also take advantage of other features available from the two services.
Accessing on-premises resources with workers controlled via Step Functions using MQTT and AWS IoT Core is a secure, reactive, and cost effective way to run on-premises jobs. Consider updating your hybrid workloads from using inefficient polling or schedulers to the reactive approach described in this post.
Amazon Lightsail is the easiest way to get started on AWS, allowing you to get your application running on your own virtual server in a matter of minutes. Lightsail bundles all the resources you need like memory, vCPU, solid-state drive (SSD), and data transfer allowance into a predictable monthly price, so budgeting is easy and […]
This post explores ways to provide mutual TLS authentication for private API Gateway endpoints. A previous post shows how to achieve this using a self-managed NGINX proxy. This post simplifies the architecture by using the native mTLS support now available for Application Load Balancers. 
This post is written by Anna Spysz, Frontend Engineer, AWS Application Composer AWS Application Composer launched in the AWS Management Console one year ago, and has now expanded to the VS Code IDE as part of the AWS Toolkit. This includes access to a generative AI partner that helps you write infrastructure as code (IaC) […]
Welcome to the 24th edition of the AWS Serverless ICYMI (in case you missed it) quarterly recap. Every quarter, we share all the most recent product launches, feature enhancements, blog posts, webinars, live streams, and other interesting things that you might have missed! In case you missed our last ICYMI, check out what happened last […]
This post is written by Alejandro Gil, Solutions Architect and Joseba Echevarría, Solutions Architect.  Introduction The purpose of this blog post is to compare video encoding performance between CPUs and Nvidia GPUs to determine the price/performance ratio in different scenarios while highlighting where it would be best to use a GPU. Video encoding plays a […]
This blog post is written by Jose Guay, Technical Account Manger, Enterprise Support.  A typical option to reduce costs associated with running Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) instances is to stop them when they are idle. However, there are scenarios where stopping an idle instance is not practical. For example, instances with development environments […]