Cloud Engineer
Innovation Program Lead
Coming to Las Vegas, April 9–11.
It’s an increasingly common conversation: How can we solve a customer’s business challenges with AI?
For example, a Google Cloud customer in the financial services industry recently asked us to help them reimagine and redesign their salespeoples’ customer engagement experience, which happens primarily over the phone. Today, that sales process is fraught with unnecessary complexity. Because data is stored across many different sources, salespeople must talk to the customer while simultaneously navigating multiple apps. Solving this challenge would not only help reduce the amount of time needed to close a deal, but also help standardize sales processes, and generate more consistent experiences. Unsurprisingly, AI solutions were top-of-mind when we were exploring potential ways we could help.
In this case, there are AI models that can improve the customer service experience with faster document-processing times, quickly identifying and summarizing the content of documents. However, building products powered by AI requires more than just a model. First, companies need to address both business goals and specific user-centric needs through detailed discovery, requirements, and features that address user pain points and opportunities. However, even the most well-intentioned customers get this wrong. The excitement and eagerness generated by AI make it far too easy to skip a few important steps that ultimately save time and money.
Companies need to first validate if creating an AI-powered product is even the right thing for their business. Building and testing prototypes with users does exactly that — proves out an idea before investing into a fully productionized AI solution. Companies who embrace a prototype-and-test mindset can move quickly, try new things, and become comfortable with failing fast to test if an idea is worth exploring. Rather than just focus on the AI model, this approach expands the impact of the idea and solves a multi-sided problem: It ensures that the needs of the business, what we think of as the money, the user, and the magic, are met; quality AI applications require all three to be successful.
With that in mind, let's walk through a full-cycle AI journey, starting from business ideation, use-case identification, data requirements, and model training while designing and prototyping that will lead an organization to a successful, user-centric AI product.
The key components of how to design and build an end-to-end AI-driven product from an idea can be summarized as follows:
Overall, having a team with a UX designer, program manager, engineering, and AI consultant is the most desirable. This team can bring many advantages to the application development process, including:
Here are some other general considerations when building an AI application:
In this post, we have discussed the key components of how to design and build an end-to-end AI-driven product from an idea and establish an initial value of the product for the business. We have also discussed some of the key deliverables that will enable your teams to continue the journey, and some of the other general considerations that you need to make when building an AI application.
Building an AI application is a complex process, but it can be very rewarding. By following the steps outlined in this post, you can increase your chances of success. Google can get you started with a product strategy and discover trends with AI offerings.
By Carolina Hernandez • 5-minute read
By Vladimir Elvov • 6-minute read
By Subra Chandramouli • 2-minute read
By Richard Seroter • 3-minute read
By Sujan Gade • 4-minute read