Every asset manager, regardless of the organization’s size, faces similar mandates: streamline maintenance planning, enhance asset or equipment reliability and optimize workflows to improve quality and productivity. In a recent IBM Institute for Business Value study of chief supply chain officers, nearly half of the respondents stated that they have adopted new technologies in response to challenges.
There is even more help on the horizon with the power of generative artificial intelligence (AI) foundation models, combined with traditional AI, to exert greater control over complex asset environments. These foundation models, built on large language models, are trained on vast amounts of unstructured and external data. They can generate responses like text and images, while simultaneously interpreting and manipulating existing data.
Let’s explore 6 ways generative AI can optimize your enterprise asset management operations, including field service, maintenance and compliance. Generative AI can:
Field service technicians, maintenance planners and field performance supervisors comprise your front-line team. They require job plans and work instructions for asset failures and repairs. Using a hybrid AI or machine learning (ML) model, you can train it on enterprise and published data, including newly acquired assets and sites.
Through interactive dialog, it can generate visual analytics and promptly deliver content to your team. Access to this knowledge can boost field service uptime by 10%–30% and increase first-time fix rates by 20%, resulting in cost savings, improved worker productivity and increased client satisfaction.
Work orders drive activity, relying on work plans and job plans to authorize and provide resources to handle tasks. The process itself, although straightforward, is time-intensive, making it no surprise that work order planning often experiences delays.
Generative AI empowers foundation models by training them with all the necessary instructions, parts, tools and skills for a specific asset or class, enabling the generation of work plans. This enhances your staff’s capabilities, resulting in a 10%–20% increase in planning proficiency. Also, generative AI can facilitate automation and recommend updates to maintenance standards, potentially leading to a 10%–25% increase in compliance.
Reliability is a critical key performance indicator in any asset-driven business. Unfortunately, experienced reliability engineers are leaving many sites, resulting in limited resources for training replacements. By using hybrid AI/ML models, generative AI generates failure and effects analyses from historical data, enabling you to prioritize and reduce serial failures by up to 25%–50% while increasing site reliability by 10%–15%.
Generative AI foundation models can train on asset class standards, including work history, maintenance plans, job plans and spare parts. They identify and recommend compliance with current standards for existing assets. By enhancing staff skills, generative AI analyses extend asset lifespan by 15%–20% and increase uptime by approximately 5%–10%.
When work orders are completed, they often signal the need to move on to the next one. However, intelligent analysis of completed work orders can reveal areas where compliance or maintenance processes need improvement. Generative AI can recommend updates to improve the effectiveness of planned maintenance by 15%–25% and create new job plans based on the completed work plan if they are absent, therefore increasing planning proficiency by 10%–20%.
Generative AI provides real-time assistance for industry, site or asset safety and regulatory compliance, reducing fines by 25% and improving compliance by up to 50%. Training models that use published safety guidelines, regulations, regulatory filings, rulings and internal data sources significantly improve the speed, accuracy and success rate of regulatory filings for planners and technicians.
Learn more about the work IBM Consulting® is doing in generative AI.

  4 min read - The future of customer experience is bright. Providing a positive customer experience can become a competitive advantage.                        

  2 min read - “It is no exaggeration to say that this initiative has just begun. With IBM, we hope to develop it into a standard in Japan and globally."                        

  5 min read - Learn how Kubernetes observability works, and how organizations can use it to optimize cloud-native IT architectures.                        

  6 min read - Data monetization empowers organizations to use their data assets and artificial intelligence (AI) capabilities to create tangible economic value. This value exchange system uses data products to enhance business performance, gain a competitive advantage, and address industry challenges in response to market demand. Financial benefits include increased revenue through the creation of adjacent industry business models, accessing new markets to establish more revenue streams, and growing existing revenue. Cost optimization can be achieved through a combination of productivity enhancements, infrastructure…                        

  3 min read - A large, multinational automobile manufacturer responsible for producing millions of vehicles annually, engaged with IBM to streamline their manufacturing processes with seamless, automated inspections driven by real-time data and artificial intelligence (AI). As an automobile manufacturer, our client has an inherent duty to provide high-quality products. Ideally, they need to discover and fix any defects well before the automobile reaches the consumer. These defects are often expensive, difficult to identify and present a myriad of significant risks to customer satisfaction.…                        

  4 min read - You’re headed to your favorite drive-thru to grab fries and a cheeseburger. It’s a simple order and as you pull in you notice there isn’t much of a line. What could possibly go wrong? Plenty. The restaurant is near a busy freeway with roaring traffic noise and airplanes fly low overhead as they approach the nearby airport. It’s windy. The stereo is blasting in the car behind you and the customer in the next lane is trying to order at…                        

  2 min read - The retail industry employs millions of people, and next-generation retail employees will be significantly impacted by the rise of generative AI.  I'm a firm believer that exceptional brick-and-mortar retail, no matter the product category, stands on three essential pillars for success: Proud, well-trained, engaged team members with clear career paths A brand deeply rooted in strong cultural values A backbone of superior technology Missing any of these elements? The magic just doesn't happen. Enter IBM. Their approach to leveraging technology…                        