The European Artificial Intelligence Act, while not yet law, is driving new levels of human oversight and regulatory compliance for artificial intelligence (AI) within the European Union. Similar to GDPR for privacy, the EU AI Act has potential to set the tone for upcoming AI regulations worldwide.  
The European Parliament reached a provisional agreement on the EU AI Act in December 2023. The act is now making its way through the final phases of the legislative process and is expected to rollout in stages in the second half of 2024. Understanding the provisions of the EU AI Act and readying for compliance is essential for any organization who develops, deploys or uses AI — or is planning to.
— European Parliament News
The primary focus of the EU AI Act is to strengthen regulatory compliance in the areas of risk management, data protection, quality management systems, transparency, human oversight, accuracy, robustness and cyber security. It aims to drive transparency and accountability into how AI systems are developed and deployed, helping to ensure that AI products placed in the market are safe for individuals to use.
The EU AI Act aims to meet the challenge to develop and deploy AI responsibly across industries including those that are highly regulated such as healthcare, finance and energy. For industries providing essential services to clients such as insurance, banking and retail, the law requires the use of a fundamental rights impact assessment that details how the use of AI will affect the rights of customers.
The EU AI Act requires that general purpose AI models, including generative AI systems such as large language (LLMs) and foundation models, adhere to a classification system based on systematic risk tiers. Higher risk tiers have more transparency requirements including model evaluation, documentation and reporting. They also involve assessment and mitigation of system risks, reporting of serious incidents and providing protections against cybersecurity. In addition, these transparency requirements include maintenance of up-to-date technical documentation, providing a summary of the content used for model training, and complying with European copyright laws.
The EU AI act follows a risk-based approach, using tiers to classify the level of risk that AI systems pose to an individual’s health, safety or fundamental rights. The three tiers are:  
The EU AI Act also imposes rules as to how customers are notified when using a chatbot or when an emotion recognition system is used. There are addition requirements for labeling deep fakes and identifying when generative AI content is used in the media.
Not complying with the EU AI Act can be costly:  
— VentureBeat
The European AI Act is currently the most comprehensive legal framework for AI regulations. Governments worldwide are taking note and actively discussing how to regulate AI technology to ensure their citizens, business and government agencies are protected from potential risks. In addition, stakeholders from corporate boards to consumers are starting to prioritize trust, transparency, fairness and accountability when it comes to AI.
IBM watsonx.governance helps you accelerate responsible, transparent and explainable AI workflows
IBM® watsonx.governance™ allows you to accelerate your AI governance, the directing, managing and monitoring of your organization’s AI activities. It employs software automation to strengthen your ability to mitigate risks, manage policies requirements, and govern the lifecycle for both generative AI and predictive machine learning (ML) models.
Watsonx.governance helps to drive model transparency, explainability and documentation in 3 key areas:
The client is responsible for ensuring compliance with laws and regulations applicable to it. IBM does not provide legal advice or represent or warrant that its services or products will ensure that the client is in compliance with any law or regulation.

  4 min read - The future of customer experience is bright. Providing a positive customer experience can become a competitive advantage.                        

  2 min read - “It is no exaggeration to say that this initiative has just begun. With IBM, we hope to develop it into a standard in Japan and globally."                        

  5 min read - Learn how Kubernetes observability works, and how organizations can use it to optimize cloud-native IT architectures.                        

  6 min read - Data monetization empowers organizations to use their data assets and artificial intelligence (AI) capabilities to create tangible economic value. This value exchange system uses data products to enhance business performance, gain a competitive advantage, and address industry challenges in response to market demand. Financial benefits include increased revenue through the creation of adjacent industry business models, accessing new markets to establish more revenue streams, and growing existing revenue. Cost optimization can be achieved through a combination of productivity enhancements, infrastructure…                        

  3 min read - A large, multinational automobile manufacturer responsible for producing millions of vehicles annually, engaged with IBM to streamline their manufacturing processes with seamless, automated inspections driven by real-time data and artificial intelligence (AI). As an automobile manufacturer, our client has an inherent duty to provide high-quality products. Ideally, they need to discover and fix any defects well before the automobile reaches the consumer. These defects are often expensive, difficult to identify and present a myriad of significant risks to customer satisfaction.…                        

  4 min read - You’re headed to your favorite drive-thru to grab fries and a cheeseburger. It’s a simple order and as you pull in you notice there isn’t much of a line. What could possibly go wrong? Plenty. The restaurant is near a busy freeway with roaring traffic noise and airplanes fly low overhead as they approach the nearby airport. It’s windy. The stereo is blasting in the car behind you and the customer in the next lane is trying to order at…                        

  2 min read - The retail industry employs millions of people, and next-generation retail employees will be significantly impacted by the rise of generative AI.  I'm a firm believer that exceptional brick-and-mortar retail, no matter the product category, stands on three essential pillars for success: Proud, well-trained, engaged team members with clear career paths A brand deeply rooted in strong cultural values A backbone of superior technology Missing any of these elements? The magic just doesn't happen. Enter IBM. Their approach to leveraging technology…                        